[Merged by Bors] - News: Release 0.10.0 (#546)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/news/2023-03-04-bevy-0.10/index.md

    // so we know that our commands will have been applied by the time our last system is run
    ).chain().in_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate))
```

Do be careful with this pattern though: it's easy to quickly end up with many poorly ordered exclusive systems, creating bottlenecks and chaos.

Similarly, state transitions can be scheduled manually, one type at a time, in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.

What will you do with this much power? We're keen to find out!

### It's All Schedules? Managing complex control flow

But what if you want to do something _weird_ with your schedule. Something non-linear, or branching, or looping. What should you reach for?

It turns out, Bevy already _had_ a great tool for this: schedules run inside of an exclusive system. The idea is pretty simple:

1. Construct a schedule, that stores whatever complex logic you want to run.
2. Store that schedule inside of a resource.
3. In an exclusive system, perform any arbitrary Rust logic you want to decide if and how your schedule runs.
4. Temporarily take the schedule out of the world, run it on the rest of the world to mutate both the schedule and the world, and then put it back in.

> With the addition of the new `Schedules` resource and the `world.run_schedule(schedule_label: impl ScheduleLabel)`API it's more :sparkles: ergonomic :sparkles: than ever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of the new `Schedules` resource and the `world.run_schedule(schedule_label: impl ScheduleLabel)`API it's more ✨ ergonomic ✨ than ever.
```

### Simpler Run Conditions

Systems may have any number of run conditions (and inherit them from the sets they belong to), but will only run if all of their run conditions return `true`.
Run criteria have been renamed to the clearer **run conditions**, which can be constructed out of any read-only system that returns `bool`.

With a new blessed pattern for complex control flow, we can finally get rid of looping run criteria. [`ShouldRun::YesAndCheckAgain`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/ecs/schedule/enum.ShouldRun.html) was not exactly straightforward to reason about, either for engine devs or users. It's always a bad sign when your bool-like enums have four possible values.

If you crave that powerful, complex control flow: use the "schedules in exclusive systems" pattern listed above.
For the other 99% of use cases, enjoy the simpler `bool`-based run conditions.

```rust
// Let's make our own run condition
fn game_end_condition(query: Query<&Player>, score: Res<Score>) -> bool {
    let player = query.single();
    player.is_alive() && score.0 > 9000
}

app.add_system(win_game.run_if(game_end_condition));
```

> Run conditions can serve as a lightweight optimization tool: each one is evaluated only each schedule update, and shared across the system set. Reducing the number of tasks spawned can really add up. Like always though: benchmark!

Reviewer 2: > each schedule update

it's a bit unclear to me what this means, and it seems like something important to understand to avoid races and subtle bugs. Is it once per set? When the schedule is started? When the first system that needs it runs?

Reviewer 3: Once per set, when the first system that needs it runs.

### Simpler States

Previously, looping run criteria were used to power states, but as mentioned above, they've been removed.
How do they work in Bevy 0.10?

1. The current value of the state of type `S` is stored in the `State<S: States>` resource. The pending value is stored in `NextState<S: States>`.
    1. To set the next state, simply mutate the value of the `NextState<S>` resource.
2. Run conditions can read the value of the `State<S>` resource.
    1. Systems with the `in_state(AppState::InGame)` run condition will only run if the value of the `State<AppState>` resource equals `AppState::InGame`.
3. Check for and apply state transitions as part of the `apply_state_transitions<S>` exclusive system. When transitioning between states:
    1. First run the `OnExit(S::VariantLeft)` schedule for the state you're leaving.
    2. Then run the `OnEnter(S::VariantEntered)` schedule.
    3. These schedules are stored in the `Schedules` resource, and can be looked up via their `ScheduleLabel`.

> 4. When the user calls `app.add_state:<s>()`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. When the user calls `app.add_state::<S>()`:
```

4. The user runs a specialized tool, digs into the source code of the engine, figures out what order their system should run in relative to the engine's system sets, and then continues on their merry way, doing this for each new system.
5. Bevy (or one of their third-party plugins) updates, breaking all of our poor users system ordering once again.

In practice, there are three broad classes of systems: gameplay logic (the majority of all end user systems), stuff that needs to happen before gameplay logic (like event cleanup and input handling) and stuff that needs to happen after gameplay logic (like rendering and audio).

By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.
Let us know how it works out for you!

### Polish Matters

As part of this work, we've taken the time to listen to our users and fix some small but high-impact things about how scheduling works.

Compare the following options for adding and ordering four systems, one after the other.

> :coffee: **Enterprise-grade** :coffee::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
☕️ **Enterprise-grade** ☕️:
```

emojis are not rendered by Zola

Reviewer 3: Thanks!

```rust
#[derive(SystemSet, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, Copy, Hash, Debug)]
#[allow(missing_docs)]
pub enum Step {
    A,
    B,
    C,
    D
}

app
    .configure_set(Step::A.before(Step::B))
    .configure_set(Step::B.before(Step::C))
    .configure_set(Step::C.before(Step::D))
    .add_system(a.in_set(Step::A))
    .add_system(b.in_set(Step::B))
    .add_system(c.in_set(Step::C))
    .add_system(d.in_set(Step::D));
```

> :weary: **Tedious** :weary::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
😩 **Tedious** 😩:
```

```rust
app
    .add_system(a.before(b))
    .add_system(b.before(c))
    .add_system(c.before(d))
    .add_system(d);
```

> :sparkles: **Ergonomic** :sparkles::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
✨ **Ergonomic** ✨:
```

* `Cardinal`: easy interpolation between any number of control points, automatically computing tangents; Catmull-Rom is a type of Cardinal spline.
* `B-Spline`: acceleration-continuous motion, particularly useful for camera paths where a smooth change in velocity (acceleration) is important to prevent harsh jerking motion.

The `CubicGenerator` trait is public, allowing you to define your own custom splines that generate `CubicCurve`s!

### Performance

The position, velocity, and acceleration of a `CubicCurve` can be evaluated at any point. These evaluations all have the same performance cost, regardless of the type of cubic curve being used. On a modern CPU, these evaluations take 1-2 ns, and animation easing - which is an iterative process - takes 15-20 ns.

## Reflection Paths: Enums and Tuples

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV</div>

Bevy's "reflection paths" enable navigating Rust values using a simple (and dynamic) string syntax. **Bevy 0.10** expands this system by adding support for tuples and enums in reflect paths:

```rust
#[derive(Reflect)]
struct MyStruct {
  data: Data,
  some_tuple: (u32, u32),
}

#[derive(Reflect)]

> struct Data {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
enum Data {
```

2. Systems that do not specify a base set will be added to the default base set for the schedule (if the schedule has one).

```rust
// You can add new base sets to any built-in ones
#[derive(Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, SystemSet)]
#[system_set(base)]
enum MyBaseSet {
    Early,
    Late,
}

app
    // This ends up in CoreSet::Update by default
    .add_system(no_base_set)
    // You must use .in_base_set rather than .in_set for explicitness
    // This is a high-impact decision!
    .add_system(post_update.in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate))
    // Look, it works!
    .add_system(custom_base_set.in_base_set(MyBaseSet::Early))
    // Ordering your base sets relative to CoreSet is probably wise
    .configure_set(MyBaseSet::Early.before(CoreSet::Update))
    .configure_set(MyBaseSet::Late.after(CoreSet::Update));
```

Pretty simple, but what does this buy us?
First, it gives you a clear hook to impose, reason about and visualize high level structure to your schedule. Yearning for a linear, stage-like design? Just order your base sets!
Secondly, it allows Bevy to set good default behavior for systems added by users, without removing their control.

> Let me tell you a story, set in a world where all of Mr. Straw Man's points above are true, and no default set is added.

Reviewer 5: IIRC, I believe that Mr Straw Man did not survive the editing process, but there is perhaps now a Mr Skeptic?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let me tell you a story, set in a world where all of our rhetorical skeptic's points above are true, and no default set is added.
```

```rust
#[derive(SystemSet, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, Copy, Hash, Debug)]
#[allow(missing_docs)]
pub enum Step {
    A,
    B,
    C,
    D
}

app
    .configure_set(Step::A.before(Step::B))
    .configure_set(Step::B.before(Step::C))
    .configure_set(Step::C.before(Step::D))
    .add_system(a.in_set(Step::A))
    .add_system(b.in_set(Step::B))
    .add_system(c.in_set(Step::C))
    .add_system(d.in_set(Step::D));
```

:weary: **Tedious** :weary::

```rust
app
    .add_system(a.before(b))
    .add_system(b.before(c))
    .add_system(c.before(d))
    .add_system(d);
```

:sparkles: **Ergonomic** :sparkles::

```rust
app.add_systems((a, b, c, d).chain());
```

There's another lovely change lurking in that last example: the `add_systems` API.

Bevy 0.9:

```rust
app
    .add_system_set(SystemSet::on_update(AppState::InGame)
        .with_system(a.before(b))
        .with_system(b.label(MyLabel::Variant))
        .with_system(c)
        .with_run_criteria(blue_moon)
    )

```

Bevy 0.10:

```rust
app.add_systems(
    (
        a.before(b),
        b.in_set(MySet::Variant),
        c
    )
    .run_if(blue_moon)
    .in_set(OnUpdate(AppState::InGame))
)
```

We've also:

> * added trivial single threaded evaluation via the [`SingleThreadedExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SingleThreadedExecutor.html) for users who prefer alternate parallelization strategies (or simply don't need it) by `@maniwani` as part of the `bevy_ecs::schedule` rewrite

Reviewer 5: These bullet points should probably be capitalized

* In [#6944](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6944) by @james7132, we shrank the core data structures involved in the stage, reducing memory fetches and netting us 9% speedups.
* In [#6885](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6885) by @james7132, we rearchitected our `PhaseItem` and `RenderCommand` infrastructure to combine common operations when fetching component data from the `World`, netting us a 7% speedup.
* In [#7053](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7053) by @james7132, we changed `TrackedRenderPass`'s allocation patterns to minimize branching within these loops, netting a 6% speedup.
* In [#7084](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7084) by @james7132, we altered how we're fetching resources from the World to minimize use of atomics in the stage, netting a 2% speedup.
* In [#6988](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6988) by @kurtkuehnert, we changed our internal resource IDs to use atomically incremented counters instead of UUIDs, reducing the comparison cost of some of the branches in the stage.

> One other ongoing development is enabling the render stage to properly parallelize command encoding across multiple threads. Following [#7248](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7248) by @james7132, we now support ingesting externally created `CommandBuffer`s into the render graph, which should allow users to encode GPU commands in parallel and import them into the render graph. This is currently blocked by wgpu, which currently locks the GPU device when encoding render passes, but we should be able to support parallel command encoding as soon as that's addressed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
One other ongoing development is enabling the render stage to properly parallelize command encoding across multiple threads. Following [#7248](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7248) by @james7132, we now support ingesting externally created `CommandBuffer`s into the render graph, which should allow users to encode GPU commands in parallel and import them into the render graph. This is currently blocked by wgpu, which locks the GPU device when encoding render passes, but we should be able to support parallel command encoding as soon as that's addressed.
```
Just a suggestion -- the double-currently seems a bit much.

For the other 99% of use cases, enjoy the simpler `bool`-based run conditions.

```rust
// Let's make our own run condition
fn game_end_condition(query: Query<&Player>, score: Res<Score>) -> bool {
    let player = query.single();
    player.is_alive() && score.0 > 9000
}

app.add_system(win_game.run_if(game_end_condition));
```

Run conditions can serve as a lightweight optimization tool: each one is evaluated only each schedule update, and shared across the system set. Reducing the number of tasks spawned can really add up. Like always though: benchmark!

Bevy 0.10 is shipping with a lovely collection of built-in [common run conditions](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/common_conditions/index.html). Courtesy of [#6587 by `@maniwani`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587), [#7579 by `@inodentry`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7579), [#7806 by `@jakobhellermann`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7806), and [#7866 by `@jabuwu`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7866) you can easily run systems if there are events to process, timers that elapsed, resources that changed, input state changes, and more.

> When you need something more sophisticated, combining run conditions is a breeze. Courtesy of [#7547](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7547), [#7559](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7559), and [#7605](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7605), you can create new run conditions with the use of system piping and the `not`, `and_then` or `or_else` run criteria combinators.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When you need something more sophisticated, combining run conditions is a breeze. Courtesy of [#7547](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7547), [#7559](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7559), and [#7605](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7605), you can create new run conditions with the use of system piping and the `not`, `and_then` or `or_else` run condition combinators.
```

5. Bevy (or one of their third-party plugins) updates, breaking all of our poor users system ordering once again.

In practice, there are three broad classes of systems: gameplay logic (the majority of all end user systems), stuff that needs to happen before gameplay logic (like event cleanup and input handling) and stuff that needs to happen after gameplay logic (like rendering and audio).

By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.
Let us know how it works out for you!

### Polish Matters

As part of this work, we've taken the time to listen to our users and fix some small but high-impact things about how scheduling works.

Compare the following options for adding and ordering four systems, one after the other.

:coffee: **Enterprise-grade** :coffee::

```rust
#[derive(SystemSet, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, Copy, Hash, Debug)]

> #[allow(missing_docs)]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: This was a joke ;) Fine to cut it though.

Reviewer 6: Oops, went over my head.

In [#6681](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6681), by tightly packing entity location metadata and avoiding extra memory lookups, we've significantly reduced the overhead when making random query lookups via `Query::get`, seeing up to a 43% reduction in the overhead spent in `Query::get` and `World::get`.

In [#6800](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6800) and [#6902](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6902), we've found that rustc can optimize out compile-time constant branches across function boundaries, moving the branch from runtime to compile time, has resulted in up to a 50% reduction in overhead when using `EntityRef::get`, `EntityMut::insert`, `EntityMut::remove`, and their variants.

In [#6391](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6391), we've reworked `CommandQueue`'s internals to be more CPU-cache friendly, which has shown up to a 37% speedup when encoding and applying commands.

## Adaptive Batching for Parallel Query Iteration

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @james7132</div>

> `Query::par_for_each` has been the tool everyone reaches for when their queries get too big to run single-threaded. Got 10,0000 entities running around on your screen? No problem, `Query::par_for_each` chunks it up into smaller batches and distributes the workload over multiple threads. However, in **Bevy 0.9** and before, `Query::par_for_each` required callers to provide a batch size to help tune these batches for maximum performance. This rather opaque knob often resulted in users just randomly picking a value and rolling with it, or fine tuning the value based on their development machines. Unfortunately, the most effective value is dependent on the runtime environment (i.e. how many logical cores does a player's computer have) and the state of the ECS World (i.e. how many entities are matched?). Ultimately most users of the API just chose a flat number and lived with the results, good or bad.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`Query::par_for_each` has been the tool everyone reaches for when their queries get too big to run single-threaded. Got 100,000 entities running around on your screen? No problem, `Query::par_for_each` chunks it up into smaller batches and distributes the workload over multiple threads. However, in **Bevy 0.9** and before, `Query::par_for_each` required callers to provide a batch size to help tune these batches for maximum performance. This rather opaque knob often resulted in users just randomly picking a value and rolling with it, or fine tuning the value based on their development machines. Unfortunately, the most effective value is dependent on the runtime environment (i.e. how many logical cores does a player's computer have) and the state of the ECS World (i.e. how many entities are matched?). Ultimately most users of the API just chose a flat number and lived with the results, good or bad.
```

```rust
// 0.9
const QUERY_BATCH_SIZE: usize = 32;

query.par_for_each(QUERY_BATCH_SIZE, |mut component| {
   // ...
});
```

> In 0.10, you no longer need to provide a batch size! Bevy will automatically evaluate the state of the World and task pools and select a batch size using a heuristic to ensure sufficient parallelism, without incurring too much overhead. This makes parallel queries as easy to use as normal single-threaded queries! While great for most typical use cases, these heuristics may not be suitable for every workload, so we've provided an escape hatch for those who need finer control over the workload distribution. In the future, we may further tune the backing heuristics to try to get the default to be closer to optimal in these workloads. For more complete details on how the heuristics work and what workloads may be considered atypical, see the documentation of [`Query::par_iter`].

Reviewer 5: This mentions an escape hatch and documentation about heuristics, but I am not seeing any of that at http://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Query.html#method.par_iter

Not sure if that's the wrong thing to link to, or if the docs don't exist. The closest I could find was [BatchingStrategy](http://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/query/struct.BatchingStrategy.html#).

Reviewer 5: While poking around, I discovered/fixed https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7900, but the currently link still doesn't seem to get me to the information described.

Author: Added BatchingStrategy info and removed the incorrect sentence about the docs.

The atmospheric fog implementation is largely based on [this great article](https://iquilezles.org/articles/fog/) by Inigo Quilez, Shadertoy co-creator and computer graphics legend. _Thanks for the great write up and inspiration!_

[`FogSettings`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/struct.FogSettings.html
[`FogFalloff`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/enum.FogFalloff.html
[`DirectionalLight`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/struct.DirectionalLight.html

## Cylinder Shape

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @JayPavlinas, @rparrett, @davidhof</div>

The cylinder shape primitive has joined our zoo of built-in shapes!

![primitive shapes](primitive_shapes.png)

## Subdividable Plane Shape

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @woodroww</div>

Bevy's [`Plane`] shape can now be subdivided any number of times.

![plane](plane.png)

[`Plane`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/prelude/shape/struct.Plane.html

## Configurable Visibility Component

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @ickk</div>

> The [`Visibility`] component controls whether or not an [`Entity`] should be rendered. **Bevy 0.10** reworked the type definition: rather having a single `is_visible: bool` field, we now use an enum with an additional mode:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The [`Visibility`] component controls whether or not an [`Entity`] should be rendered. **Bevy 0.10** reworked the type definition: rather than having a single `is_visible: bool` field, we now use an enum with an additional mode:
```

There's still a lot more to be done here: integrating the focus system with a [gamepad-driven UI controls](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/41) solution, cleaning up the data model to [make sure "accessible by default" is a reality](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/7862)), and adding support for remaining features in AccessKit.

Special thanks to `@mcwcampbell`, the lead author of AccessKit, for reviewing our integration and working with us to reduce the number of dependencies upstream, [substantially improving both compile times and final executable size](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1440978453). This is [still a serious challenge on Linux](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1432144117), and so the `accesskit_unix` feature flag is [disabled by default for now](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1433896811).

> ## What's Next?

Reviewer 7: For upcoming changes, TAA https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7291 and SSAO https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7402 are two big ones.

Thanks to the fantastic work of our ECS team, the hotly awaited ["stageless" scheduling RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/blob/main/rfcs/45-stageless.md) has been implemented!

Schedule v3 is the culmination of significant design and implementation work. Scheduling APIs are a central and defining part of the Bevy developer experience, so we had to be very thoughtful and meticulous about this next evolution of the API. In addition to the [RFC PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/45), the [initial implementation PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587) by `@maniwani` and the [Bevy Engine internals port PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7267) by `@alice-i-cecile` are great places to start if you would like a view into our process and rationale. As we all know, plans and implementations are two different things. Our final implementation is a bit different from the initial RFC (in a good way).

There's been a lot of changes, but we've put a lot of care into ensuring the [migration path](/learn/book/migration-guides/0.9-0.10/) for existing applications is relatively straightforward. Don't sweat it!

> Lets take a look at what shipped in 0.10!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at what shipped in 0.10!
```

### A Single Unified Schedule

Have you ever wanted to specify that `system_a` runs before `system_b`, only to be met with confusing warnings that `system_b` isn't found because it's in a different stage?

No more! All systems within a single **schedule** are now stored in a single data structure with a global awareness of what's going on.

This simplifies our internal logic, makes your code more robust to refactoring, and allows plugin authors to specify high-level invariants (e.g. "movement must occur before collision checking") without locking themselves in to an exact schedule location.

[![main_schedule_diagram](main_schedule_diagram.svg)](main_schedule_diagram.svg)

> This diagram, made with [@jakobhellermann's `bevy_mod_debugdump` crate](https://github.com/jakobhellermann/bevy_mod_debugdump) shows a simplified version of Bevy's default schedule.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This diagram made with [@jakobhellermann's `bevy_mod_debugdump` crate](https://github.com/jakobhellermann/bevy_mod_debugdump) shows a simplified version of Bevy's default schedule.
```

### Configurable System Sets

To support more natural and flexible control over "how are my systems run and scheduled", the idea of a "system set" has been redefined, rolling up the existing "system label" concept into one straightforward but powerful abstraction.

Every system, once it is part of a schedule, stores **system configuration** metadata: which run conditions are attached, how they are ordered relative to other systems or sets and so on.
**System sets** are named collections of systems that share system configuration across all of their members. This is both distributive and additive: ordering systems relative to a system set applies that ordering to _all_ systems in that set, in addition to any configuration on each individual system.

> Let's jump right in to what this would look like.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Let's jump right into what this would look like.
```

}

app
    // .with_run_criteria -> .run_if <3
    // Note that in this case we're modifying this single `gravity` system, not the entire `PhysicsSet::Forces`
    // as this is a method on a single system.
    // The order of these method calls doesn't matter!
   .add_system(gravity.in_set(PhysicsSet::Forces).run_if(gravity_enabled))
    // Add multiple systems at once with add_systems!
    .add_systems(
        (apply_acceleration, apply_velocity)
            // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
            .chain()
            .in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics),
    )
    .add_system(detect_collisions.in_set(PhysicsSet::CollisionDetection))
    // You can add configuration for an entire set in a single place
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::Forces
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::Update)
        .before(PhysicsSet::Kinematics)
    )
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::Kinematics
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
        // Previously, this would have been impossible,
        // as `CollisionDetection` is run in `Update`, which would be represented by a different stage
        .before(PhysicsSet::CollisionDetection)

>         // Ooh run condition combinators :eyes:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
        // Ooh run condition combinators 👀
```

        .run_if(not(game_paused))
    )
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::CollisionDetection
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
    )
```

A system can belong to any number of sets, adding the configuration from each set it belongs to to its own configuration. Similarly, sets can be nested, allowing you to granularly define a clear set of rules for app-level scheduling patterns.

These rules must be compatible with each other: any paradoxes (like a system set inside of itself, or a system that must run both before and after a set) will result in a runtime panic with a helpful error message.

> As long as you can construct the type of a system set, you can both order your systems relative to it, and configure its behavior even after it has been initialized elsewhere! Crucially system configuration is strictly additive: you cannot _remove_ rules added elsewhere. This is both a "anti-spaghetti" and "plugin privacy" consideration. When this rule is combined with Rust's robust type privacy rules, plugin authors can make careful decisions about which exact invariants need to be upheld, and reorganize code and systems internally without breaking consumers.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
As long as you can construct the type of a system set, you can both order your systems relative to it, and configure its behavior even after it has been initialized elsewhere! Crucially system configuration is strictly additive: you cannot _remove_ rules added elsewhere. This is both an "anti-spaghetti" and "plugin privacy" consideration. When this rule is combined with Rust's robust type privacy rules, plugin authors can make careful decisions about which exact invariants need to be upheld, and reorganize code and systems internally without breaking consumers.
```

    }
}

// Behold the ergonomics
app
    .add_schedule(MySchedule, my_schedule)
    .add_system(run_my_schedule);
```

Bevy uses this pattern for five rather different things at 0.10 release:

1. **Startup systems:** these now live in their own schedule, which is run once at the start of the app.
2. **Fixed timestep systems:** another schedule?! The exclusive system that runs this schedule accumulates time, running a while loop that repeatedly runs `CoreSchedule::FixedTimestep` until all of the accumulated time has been spent.
3. **Entering and exiting states:** a bonanza of schedules. Each collection of systems that runs logic to enter and exit a state variant is stored in its own schedule, which are called based on the change in state in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.
4. **Rendering:** all rendering logic is stored in its own schedule to allow it to run asynchronously relative to gameplay logic.
5. **Controlling the outermost loop:** in order to handle the "startup schedule first, then main schedule" logic, we wrap it all up in a minimal overhead `CoreSchedule::Outer` and then run our schedules as the sole exclusive system there.

> Follow the bread crumbs starting at [`CoreSchedule`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSchedule.html) for more info.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Follow the breadcrumbs starting at [`CoreSchedule`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSchedule.html) for more info.
```

    next_state: ResMut<NextState<AppState>>,
){
    let start_game_interaction_state = button_query.single();
    if start_game_interaction_state == Interaction::Pressed {
        *next_state = NextState(AppState::InGame);
    }
}
```

But wait you say: what about my state stack? My elaborate queued transitions?! My meticulous error handling on every operation that I definitely didn't just unwrap?!!

In practice, we found that the state stack was a) very complex to learn b) very prone to exasperating bugs c) mostly ignored.
As a result, states are now "stackless": only one queued state of each type at a time.

Thanks to the help of some brave alpha testers, we're reasonably confident that this shouldn't be too bad to migrate away from.
If you were relying on the state stack, you might choose to:

* rearchitect some of that logic out of states
* use additional state types, which capture orthogonal elements of your app's status
* build your own state stack abstraction using the same patterns as Bevy's first-party version: please let the rest of the community know so you can collaborate!

### Base Sets: Getting Default Behavior Right

> Of course the skeptical reader may point out that:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Of course, the skeptical reader may point out that:
```

        .with_system(b.label(MyLabel::Variant))
        .with_system(c)
        .with_run_criteria(blue_moon)
    )

```

Bevy 0.10:

```rust
app.add_systems(
    (
        a.before(b),
        b.in_set(MySet::Variant),
        c
    )
    .run_if(blue_moon)
    .in_set(OnUpdate(AppState::InGame))
)
```

We've also:

* Added trivial single threaded evaluation via the [`SingleThreadedExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SingleThreadedExecutor.html) for users who prefer alternate parallelization strategies (or simply don't need it) by `@maniwani` as part of the `bevy_ecs::schedule` rewrite
  * we already default to this on WASM, so don't worry about setting it up for your jam games!
  * wish commands just applied instantly? We've got you: use [`SimpleExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SimpleExecutor.html) and trade performance for clarity and convenience to your heart's content.
* Added ultra-convenient prebuilt error-handling system piping adaptors in [#6751 by `@edwox`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6751) so you can quickly and easily use the `?` operator in your Bevy systems and log any failure cases

>   * Put an end to the rightward drift: just use `.add_system(fallible_system.pipe(system_adaptor::warn)))` :heart_eyes:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  * Put an end to the rightward drift: just use `.add_system(fallible_system.pipe(system_adaptor::warn)))` 😍
```

### No Tonemapping

This is generally not recommended as HDR lighting is not intended to be used as color.

![no tonemapping](tm_none.png)

### Reinhard

![reinhard](tm_reinhard.png)

### Reinhard Luminance

This is what we had in previous versions of Bevy. It is still our default algorithm.

![reinhard luminance](tm_reinhard_luminance.png)

### ACES Fitted

![aces](tm_aces.png)

### AgX

![agx](tm_agx.png)

### SomewhatBoringDisplayTransform

![SomewhatBoringDisplayTransform](tm_sbdt.png)

### TonyMcMapface

Tomasz Stachowiak [recently released](https://twitter.com/h3r2tic/status/1626579257559502850?lang=en) this nice new display transform. In their own words "Tony maps HDR Rec.709 to LDR in a (subjectively) natural way, without messing too much with contrast or look"

![TonyMcMapface](tm_tonymcmapface.png)

### Blender Filmic

From the 3D software package we know and love!

![Blender Filmic](tm_blender_filmic.png)

## Color Grading Control

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DGriffin91</div>

> We've added some basic control over color grading parameters such as exposure, gamma, "pre-tonemapping saturation", and "post-tonemapping saturation". These can be configured per-camera using the new [`ColorGrading`] component

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We've added some basic control over color grading parameters such as exposure, gamma, "pre-tonemapping saturation", and "post-tonemapping saturation". These can be configured per-camera using the new [`ColorGrading`] component.
```

```rust
#[derive(Component, Clone, ExtractComponent)]
pub struct Car {
    pub wheels: usize,
}
```

This expands to this:

```rust
impl ExtractComponent for Car
{
    type Query = &'static Self;
    type Filter = ();
    type Out = Self;
    fn extract_component(item: QueryItem<'_, Self::Query>) -> Option<Self::Out> {
        Some(item.clone())
    }
}
```

It also supports filters!

```rust
#[derive(Component, Clone, ExtractComponent)]
#[extract_component_filter(With<Fuel>)]
pub struct Car {
    pub wheels: usize,
}
```

[`ExtractComponent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/render/extract_component/trait.ExtractComponent.html

## Upgraded wgpu to 0.15

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Elabajaba</div>

**Bevy 0.10** now uses the latest and greatest [`wgpu`](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu) (our choice of low level graphics layer). In addition to [a number of nice API improvements and bug fixes](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/releases/tag/v0.15.0), `wgpu` now uses the DXC shader compiler for DX12, which is faster, less buggy, and allows for new features.

> ## Enabled OpenGL Backend By Default

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
## Enabled OpenGL Backend by Default
```

+++
title = "Bevy 0.10"
date = 2023-03-04
[extra]
author = "Bevy Contributors"
image = "ruins.png"
show_image = true
image_subtitle = "Ruins scene illustrating Bevy's new material blend modes and fog"
image_subtitle_link = "https://github.com/coreh/bevy-demo-ruins"
+++

> Thanks to **X** contributors, **X** pull requests, community reviewers, and our [**generous sponsors**](/community/donate), I'm happy to announce the **Bevy 0.10** release on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/bevy)!

Reviewer 3: Remember to fill in these numbers.

Reviewer 9: Remember to do it at the end of the post too, there's the contributor list missing as well as a count of contributors.

<!-- more -->

* **ECS Schedule v3**: Bevy now has much simpler, more flexible scheduling. Systems are now stored in a unified schedule, commands can be applied explicitly via `apply_system_buffers`, and a whole lot of quality of life and bug fixes.
* **Cascaded Shadow Maps**: Higher quality shadow maps that cover larger distances, where the quality follows the camera.
* **Environment Map Lighting**: 360 ambient image based lighting that can cheaply and drastically improve the visual quality of a scene.
* **Depth and Normal Prepass**: Render depth and normal textures for a scene prior to the main pass, enabling new effects and (in some cases) improved performance. Shadow mapping uses the prepass shaders, which enables transparent textures to cast shadows.
* **Smooth Skeletal Animation Transitions**: Smoothly transition between two skeletal animations playing at the same time!
* **Improved Android Support**: Bevy now works out of the box on more Android devices (with a couple of caveats)
* **Revamped Bloom**: Bloom now looks better, is easier to control, and has fewer visual artifacts.

> * **Distance and Atmospheric Fog**: Add depth and ambience to your scene with 3D distance and atmospheric fog effects!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* **Distance and Atmospheric Fog**: Add depth and ambiance to your scene with 3D distance and atmospheric fog effects!
```

## ECS Schedule v3: simpler, more flexible scheduling

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @alice-i-cecile, @maniwani, @WrongShoe, @cart, @jakobhellermann, @JoJoJet, @geieredgar and a whole lot more </div>

Thanks to the fantastic work of our ECS team, the hotly awaited ["stageless" scheduling RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/blob/main/rfcs/45-stageless.md) has been implemented!

Schedule v3 is the culmination of significant design and implementation work. Scheduling APIs are a central and defining part of the Bevy developer experience, so we had to be very thoughtful and meticulous about this next evolution of the API. In addition to the [RFC PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/45), the [initial implementation PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587) by `@maniwani` and the [Bevy Engine internals port PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7267) by `@alice-i-cecile` are great places to start if you would like a view into our process and rationale. As we all know, plans and implementations are two different things. Our final implementation is a bit different from the initial RFC (in a good way).

> There's been a lot of changes, but we've put a lot of care into ensuring the [migration path](/learn/book/migration-guides/0.9-0.10/) for existing applications is relatively straightforward. Don't sweat it!

Reviewer 3: This should link directly to the Schedule v3 section of the migration guide.

Let's take a look at what shipped in 0.10!

### A Single Unified Schedule

Have you ever wanted to specify that `system_a` runs before `system_b`, only to be met with confusing warnings that `system_b` isn't found because it's in a different stage?

No more! All systems within a single **schedule** are now stored in a single data structure with a global awareness of what's going on.

> This simplifies our internal logic, makes your code more robust to refactoring, and allows plugin authors to specify high-level invariants (e.g. "movement must occur before collision checking") without locking themselves in to an exact schedule location.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This simplifies our internal logic, makes your code more robust to refactoring, and allows plugin authors to specify high-level invariants (e.g. "movement must occur before collision checking") without locking themselves into an exact schedule location.
```

[![main_schedule_diagram](main_schedule_diagram.svg)](main_schedule_diagram.svg)

This diagram made with [@jakobhellermann's `bevy_mod_debugdump` crate](https://github.com/jakobhellermann/bevy_mod_debugdump) shows a simplified version of Bevy's default schedule.

### Configurable System Sets

To support more natural and flexible control over "how are my systems run and scheduled", the idea of a "system set" has been redefined, rolling up the existing "system label" concept into one straightforward but powerful abstraction.

> Every system, once it is part of a schedule, stores **system configuration** metadata: which run conditions are attached, how they are ordered relative to other systems or sets and so on.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Every system, once it is part of a schedule, stores **system configuration** metadata: which run conditions are attached, how they are ordered relative to other systems or sets, and so on.
```

**System sets** are named collections of systems that share system configuration across all of their members. This is both distributive and additive: ordering systems relative to a system set applies that ordering to _all_ systems in that set, in addition to any configuration on each individual system.

Let's jump right into what this would look like.

```rust
// System set types are used to provide stable, typed identifiers
// for groups of systems, allowing external systems to order themselves
// without being aware of internal details.
// Each variant of this enum is a distinct system set.
#[derive(SystemSet, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone)]
enum PhysicsSet {
    Forces,
    Kinematics,
    CollisionDetection
}

app
    // .with_run_criteria -> .run_if <3

>     // Note that in this case we're modifying this single `gravity` system, not the entire `PhysicsSet::Forces`

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    // Note that in this case, we're modifying this single `gravity` system, not the entire `PhysicsSet::Forces`
```

    // The order of these method calls doesn't matter!
   .add_system(gravity.in_set(PhysicsSet::Forces).run_if(gravity_enabled))
    // Add multiple systems at once with add_systems!
    .add_systems(
        (apply_acceleration, apply_velocity)
            // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
            .chain()
            .in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics),
    )
    .add_system(detect_collisions.in_set(PhysicsSet::CollisionDetection))
    // You can add configuration for an entire set in a single place
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::Forces
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::Update)
        .before(PhysicsSet::Kinematics)
    )
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::Kinematics
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
        // Previously, this would have been impossible,
        // as `CollisionDetection` is run in `Update`, which would be represented by a different stage
        .before(PhysicsSet::CollisionDetection)
        // Ooh run condition combinators 👀
        .run_if(not(game_paused))
    )
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::CollisionDetection
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
    )
```

> A system can belong to any number of sets, adding the configuration from each set it belongs to to its own configuration. Similarly, sets can be nested, allowing you to granularly define a clear set of rules for app-level scheduling patterns.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
A system can belong to any number of sets, adding the configuration from each set it belongs to its own configuration. Similarly, sets can be nested, allowing you to granularly define a clear set of rules for app-level scheduling patterns.
```

Reviewer 10: The second `to` is needed here.

As long as you can construct the type of a system set, you can both order your systems relative to it, and configure its behavior even after it has been initialized elsewhere! Crucially system configuration is strictly additive: you cannot _remove_ rules added elsewhere. This is both an "anti-spaghetti" and "plugin privacy" consideration. When this rule is combined with Rust's robust type privacy rules, plugin authors can make careful decisions about which exact invariants need to be upheld, and reorganize code and systems internally without breaking consumers.

### Directly Schedule Exclusive Systems

Ever wished that you could just flush commands or run an exclusive system right before this system but after that system without shuffling your entire schedule to make it work?

Now you can! Thanks to ongoing cleanup work in the ECS scheduling internals, and the unified schedule mentioned above, exclusive systems can now be scheduled and ordered like any other system.

```rust
app
    .add_system(ordinary_system)
    // This works?!
    .add_system(exclusive_system.after(ordinary_system))
```

> This is particularly powerful, as **command flushes** (which apply any queued up `Commands` added in systems to e.g. spawn and despawn entities) are now simply performed in the `apply_system_buffers` exclusive system.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This is particularly powerful, as **command flushes** (which apply any queued-up `Commands` added in systems to e.g. spawn and despawn entities) are now simply performed in the `apply_system_buffers` exclusive system.
```

```rust
app
    .add_systems((
        system_that_produces_commands,
        // Built-in exclusive system that applies generated commands
        apply_system_buffers,
        system_that_needs_commands_to_have_been_applied
    // chain() creates an ordering between each of these systems,
    // so we know that our commands will have been applied by the time our last system is run
    ).chain().in_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate))
```

Do be careful with this pattern though: it's easy to quickly end up with many poorly ordered exclusive systems, creating bottlenecks and chaos.

Similarly, state transitions can be scheduled manually, one type at a time, in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.

What will you do with this much power? We're keen to find out!

### It's All Schedules? Managing complex control flow

> But what if you want to do something _weird_ with your schedule. Something non-linear, or branching, or looping. What should you reach for?

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
But what if you want to do something _weird_ with your schedule? Something non-linear, branching, or looping. What should you reach for?
```

4. Temporarily take the schedule out of the world, run it on the rest of the world to mutate both the schedule and the world, and then put it back in.

With the addition of the new `Schedules` resource and the `world.run_schedule(schedule_label: impl ScheduleLabel)`API it's more ✨ ergonomic ✨ than ever.

```rust
// A schedule!
let mut my_schedule = Schedule::new();
schedule.add_system(my_system);

// A schedule label for it
#[derive(ScheduleLabel, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone)]
struct MySchedule;

// An exclusive system to run this schedule
fn run_my_schedule(world: &mut World) {
    while very_complex_logic(){
        world.run_schedule(MySchedule);
    }
}

// Behold the ergonomics
app
    .add_schedule(MySchedule, my_schedule)
    .add_system(run_my_schedule);
```

Bevy uses this pattern for five rather different things at 0.10 release:

1. **Startup systems:** these now live in their own schedule, which is run once at the start of the app.
2. **Fixed timestep systems:** another schedule?! The exclusive system that runs this schedule accumulates time, running a while loop that repeatedly runs `CoreSchedule::FixedTimestep` until all of the accumulated time has been spent.

> 3. **Entering and exiting states:** a bonanza of schedules. Each collection of systems that runs logic to enter and exit a state variant is stored in its own schedule, which are called based on the change in state in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
3. **Entering and exiting states:** a bonanza of schedules. Each collection of systems that runs logic to enter and exit a state variant is stored in its own schedule, which is called based on the change in state in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.
```

### Simpler Run Conditions

Systems may have any number of run conditions (and inherit them from the sets they belong to), but will only run if all of their run conditions return `true`.
Run criteria have been renamed to the clearer **run conditions**, which can be constructed out of any read-only system that returns `bool`.

With a new blessed pattern for complex control flow, we can finally get rid of looping run criteria. [`ShouldRun::YesAndCheckAgain`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/ecs/schedule/enum.ShouldRun.html) was not exactly straightforward to reason about, either for engine devs or users. It's always a bad sign when your bool-like enums have four possible values.

If you crave that powerful, complex control flow: use the "schedules in exclusive systems" pattern listed above.
For the other 99% of use cases, enjoy the simpler `bool`-based run conditions.

```rust
// Let's make our own run condition
fn game_end_condition(query: Query<&Player>, score: Res<Score>) -> bool {
    let player = query.single();
    player.is_alive() && score.0 > 9000
}

> app.add_system(win_game.run_if(game_end_condition));

Reviewer 11: Upon reading `fn game_end_condition` I assumed it was a loss condition and was confused until seeing the `win_game` system right at the end.

Renaming to `game_win_condition` makes the intent clear from the beginning, but is a bit repetitive.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
fn game_win_condition(query: Query<&Player>, score: Res<Score>) -> bool {
    let player = query.single();
    player.is_alive() && score.0 > 9000
}

app.add_system(win_game.run_if(game_win_condition));
```

```

> Run conditions can serve as a lightweight optimization tool: each one is evaluated only each schedule update, and shared across the system set. Reducing the number of tasks spawned can really add up. Like always though: benchmark!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run conditions can also serve as a lightweight optimization tool. Run conditions are evaluated on the main thread, and each run criteria is evaluated exactly once each schedule update, at the time of the first system in the set that relies on it. Systems disabled by run conditions don't spawn a task, which can add up across many systems. Like always though: benchmark!
```

Bevy 0.10 is shipping with a lovely collection of built-in [common run conditions](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/common_conditions/index.html). Courtesy of [#6587 by `@maniwani`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587), [#7579 by `@inodentry`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7579), [#7806 by `@jakobhellermann`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7806), and [#7866 by `@jabuwu`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7866) you can easily run systems if there are events to process, timers that elapsed, resources that changed, input state changes, and more.

> When you need something more sophisticated, combining run conditions is a breeze. Courtesy of [#7547](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7547), [#7559](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7559), and [#7605](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7605), you can create new run conditions with the use of system piping and the `not`, `and_then` or `or_else` run condition combinators.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
When you need something more sophisticated, combining run conditions is a breeze. Courtesy of [#7547](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7547), [#7559](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7559), and [#7605](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7605), you can create new run conditions with the use of system piping and the `not`, `and_then`, or `or_else` run condition combinators.
```

If you were relying on the state stack, you might choose to:

* rearchitect some of that logic out of states
* use additional state types, which capture orthogonal elements of your app's status
* build your own state stack abstraction using the same patterns as Bevy's first-party version: please let the rest of the community know so you can collaborate!

### Base Sets: Getting Default Behavior Right

Of course, the skeptical reader may point out that:

1. Bevy automatically runs its systems in parallel.
2. [The order of systems is nondeterministic unless there is an explicit ordering relationship between them](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/latest/examples/ecs/nondeterministic_system_order.rs)?
3. All of the systems are now stored in a single `Schedule` object with no barriers between them?
4. Systems can belong to any number of system sets, each of which can add their own behavior?

Won't this lead to utter chaos and tedious spaghetti-flavored work to resolve every last ordering ambiguity?
Many users _liked_ stages, they were helpful for understanding the structure of my app!

> Well, I'm glad you asked, rhetorical skeptic. To reduce this chaos (and ease migration), Bevy 0.10 comes with a brand new collection of system sets with the default plugins: [`CoreSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSet.html), [`StartupSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.StartupSet.html) and [`RenderSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/render/enum.RenderSet.html). The similarity of their names to [`CoreStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.CoreStage.html), [`StartupStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.StartupStage.html) and [`RenderStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/render/enum.RenderStage.html) is not a coincidence: there are command flush points between each set, and existing systems have been migrated directly.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Well, I'm glad you asked, rhetorical skeptic. To reduce this chaos (and ease migration), Bevy 0.10 comes with a brand new collection of system sets with the default plugins: [`CoreSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSet.html), [`StartupSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.StartupSet.html), and [`RenderSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/render/enum.RenderSet.html). The similarity of their names to [`CoreStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.CoreStage.html), [`StartupStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.StartupStage.html), and [`RenderStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/render/enum.RenderStage.html) is not a coincidence: there are command flush points between each set, and existing systems have been migrated directly.
```

> Some parts of the stage-centric architecture were appealing: a clear high level structure, coordination on flush points (to reduce excessive bottlenecks) and good default behavior.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Some parts of the stage-centric architecture were appealing: a clear high-level structure, coordination on flush points (to reduce excessive bottlenecks), and good default behavior.
```

To keep those bits (while excising the frustrating ones), we've introduced the concept of **base sets**, added in [#7466](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7466) by `@cart`. Base sets are system sets, except:

1. Every system can belong to at most one base set.
2. Systems that do not specify a base set will be added to the default base set for the schedule (if the schedule has one).

```rust
// You can add new base sets to any built-in ones
#[derive(Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, SystemSet)]
#[system_set(base)]
enum MyBaseSet {
    Early,
    Late,
}

app
    // This ends up in CoreSet::Update by default
    .add_system(no_base_set)
    // You must use .in_base_set rather than .in_set for explicitness
    // This is a high-impact decision!
    .add_system(post_update.in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate))
    // Look, it works!
    .add_system(custom_base_set.in_base_set(MyBaseSet::Early))
    // Ordering your base sets relative to CoreSet is probably wise
    .configure_set(MyBaseSet::Early.before(CoreSet::Update))
    .configure_set(MyBaseSet::Late.after(CoreSet::Update));
```

Pretty simple, but what does this buy us?

> First, it gives you a clear hook to impose, reason about and visualize high level structure to your schedule. Yearning for a linear, stage-like design? Just order your base sets!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
First, it gives you a clear hook to impose, reason about, and visualize high-level structure to your schedule. Yearning for a linear, stage-like design? Just order your base sets!
```

Secondly, it allows Bevy to set good default behavior for systems added by users, without removing their control.

Let me tell you a story, set in a world where all of our rhetorical skeptic's points above are true, and no default set is added.

1. A new user adds the `make_player_run` system to their app.
2. Sometimes this system runs before input handling, leading to randomly dropped inputs. Sometimes it runs after rendering, leading to strange flickers.
3. After much frustration, the user discovers that these are due to "system execution order ambiguities".
4. The user runs a specialized tool, digs into the source code of the engine, figures out what order their system should run in relative to the engine's system sets, and then continues on their merry way, doing this for each new system.
5. Bevy (or one of their third-party plugins) updates, breaking all of our poor users system ordering once again.

> In practice, there are three broad classes of systems: gameplay logic (the majority of all end user systems), stuff that needs to happen before gameplay logic (like event cleanup and input handling) and stuff that needs to happen after gameplay logic (like rendering and audio).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In practice, there are three broad classes of systems: gameplay logic (the majority of all end user systems), stuff that needs to happen before gameplay logic (like event cleanup and input handling), and stuff that needs to happen after gameplay logic (like rendering and audio).
```

> By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high-level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.
```

Let us know how it works out for you!

### Polish Matters

As part of this work, we've taken the time to listen to our users and fix some small but high-impact things about how scheduling works.

> Compare the following options for adding and ordering four systems, one after the other.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compare the following options for adding and ordering four systems, one after the next.
```

Author: "One after the next" doesn't seem right to me. How can something be "after the next"?

☕️ **Enterprise-grade** ☕️:

```rust
#[derive(SystemSet, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, Copy, Hash, Debug)]
pub enum Step {
    A,
    B,
    C,
    D
}

app
    .configure_set(Step::A.before(Step::B))
    .configure_set(Step::B.before(Step::C))
    .configure_set(Step::C.before(Step::D))
    .add_system(a.in_set(Step::A))
    .add_system(b.in_set(Step::B))
    .add_system(c.in_set(Step::C))
    .add_system(d.in_set(Step::D));
```

😩 **Tedious** 😩:

```rust
app
    .add_system(a.before(b))
    .add_system(b.before(c))
    .add_system(c.before(d))
    .add_system(d);
```

✨ **Ergonomic** ✨:

```rust
app.add_systems((a, b, c, d).chain());
```

There's another lovely change lurking in that last example: the `add_systems` API.

Bevy 0.9:

```rust
app
    .add_system_set(SystemSet::on_update(AppState::InGame)
        .with_system(a.before(b))
        .with_system(b.label(MyLabel::Variant))
        .with_system(c)
        .with_run_criteria(blue_moon)
    )

```

Bevy 0.10:

```rust
app.add_systems(
    (
        a.before(b),
        b.in_set(MySet::Variant),
        c
    )
    .run_if(blue_moon)
    .in_set(OnUpdate(AppState::InGame))
)
```

We've also:

> * Added trivial single threaded evaluation via the [`SingleThreadedExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SingleThreadedExecutor.html) for users who prefer alternate parallelization strategies (or simply don't need it) by `@maniwani` as part of the `bevy_ecs::schedule` rewrite

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* Added trivial single-threaded evaluation via the [`SingleThreadedExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SingleThreadedExecutor.html) for users who prefer alternate parallelization strategies (or simply don't need it) by `@maniwani` as part of the `bevy_ecs::schedule` rewrite
```

  * we already default to this on WASM, so don't worry about setting it up for your jam games!
  * wish commands just applied instantly? We've got you: use [`SimpleExecutor`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.SimpleExecutor.html) and trade performance for clarity and convenience to your heart's content.
* Added ultra-convenient prebuilt error-handling system piping adaptors in [#6751 by `@edwox`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6751) so you can quickly and easily use the `?` operator in your Bevy systems and log any failure cases
  * Put an end to the rightward drift: just use `.add_system(fallible_system.pipe(system_adaptor::warn)))` 😍

> * Removed string-based labels: these were prone to nasty conflicts, easy to typo, didn't play nice with IDEs and are no longer needed due to the much improved ergonomics of ordering systems in other forms

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* Removed string-based labels: these were prone to nasty conflicts, easy to typo, didn't play nice with IDEs, and are no longer needed due to the much-improved ergonomics of ordering systems in other forms
```

* Made sure you can pipe data into and out of exclusive systems in [#6698 by `@inodentry`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6698)
* Significantly improved ambiguity detection and cycle reporting: check out the [`ScheduleBuildSettings`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/struct.ScheduleBuildSettings.html) docs for more info. If you haven't tried this out on your app yet: you should take a look!

The Bevy ECS team has worked closely with `@jakobhellerman`, the author of [`bevy_mod_debugdump`](https://crates.io/crates/bevy_mod_debugdump), the leading third-party schedule visualization plugin, to ensure it keeps working better than ever.

> It's a great tool that we are looking to build on to create a first party solution: you should strongly consider adding it to your toolbox.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
It's a great tool that we are looking to build on to create a first-party solution: you should strongly consider adding it to your toolbox.
```

* The resolution didn't adapt to camera positioning. Shadows might look great in one position, but terrible in another position.
* The "shadow projection" had to be manually defined. This made it hard and unapproachable to configure shadows to match a given scene.

**Bevy 0.10** adds "cascaded shadow maps", which breaks up the camera's view frustum into a series of configurable "cascades", which each have their own shadow map. This enables shadows in the cascade "close to the camera" to be highly detailed, while allowing shadows "far from the camera" to cover a wider area with less detail. Because it uses the camera's view frustum to define the shadow projections, the shadow quality remains consistent as the camera moves through the scene. This also means that users don't need to manually configure shadow projections anymore. They are automatically calculated!

<video controls loop><source  src="shadow_cascades.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

Notice how the nearby shadows are highly detailed whereas the shadows in the distance become less detailed as they get farther away (which doesn't matter as much because they are far away).

> While shadow cascades solve important problems, they also introduce new ones. How many cascades should you use? What is the minimum and maximum distance from the camera where shadows should appear? How much overlap should there be between cascades? These parameters must be dialed in to fit a given scene.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While shadow cascades solve important problems, they also introduce new ones. How many cascades should you use? What is the minimum and maximum distance from the camera where shadows should appear? How much overlap should there be between cascades? Be sure to dial in these parameters to fit your scenes.
```

## Environment Map Lighting

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @JMS55</div>

Environment maps are a popular and computationally cheap way to significantly improve the quality of a scene's lighting. It uses a cube map texture to provide 360 lighting "from all directions". This is especially apparent for reflective surfaces, but it applies to all lit materials.

This is what the PBR material looks like without environment map lighting:

![env map before](env_map_before.png)

And this is what the PBR material looks like with environment map lighting:

![env map after](env_map_after.png)

For scenes that need constant lighting (especially outdoor scenes), environment maps are a great solution. And because environment maps are arbitrary images, artists have a lot of control over the character of the scene's lighting.

## Depth and Normal Prepass

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @icesentry, Rob Swain (@superdump), @robtfm, @JMS55</div>

<video controls loop><source  src="force_field.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>
<p class="release-feature-authors">This effect uses the depth from the prepass to find the intersection between the ground and the force field</p>

> Bevy now has the ability to run a depth and/or normal prepass. This means the depth and normal textures will be generated in a render pass that runs before the main pass and can therefore be used during the main pass. This enables various special effects like Screen Space Ambient Occlusion, Temporal Anti Aliasing and many more. These are currently being worked on and should be available in the next release of bevy.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Bevy now has the ability to run a depth and/or normal prepass. This means the depth and normal textures will be generated in a render pass that runs before the main pass and can therefore be used during the main pass. This enables various special effects like Screen Space Ambient Occlusion, Temporal Anti Aliasing, and many more. These are currently being worked on and should be available in the next release of bevy.
```

> Bevy now has the ability to run a depth and/or normal prepass. This means the depth and normal textures will be generated in a render pass that runs before the main pass and can therefore be used during the main pass. This enables various special effects like Screen Space Ambient Occlusion, Temporal Anti Aliasing and many more. These are currently being worked on and should be available in the next release of bevy.

Reviewer 3: This section is unusually high on dense jargon. Can we try to briefly explain what a "depth prepass" and "normal prepass" are?

Reviewer 12: That's what I tried doing in the second sentence. I'm not really sure what else I could add. This is generally intended for people already familiar with rendering and won't really impact people that don't want to touch shaders. The images right after also show both textures to try to give a more visual explanation.

Reviewer 12: In other words, the people that know what a depth or normal texture are and want to use it will be happy about it, and for the ones that don't know what it is, I'm not sure this is the best place to teach rendering concepts but the images should help a lot.

Author: Yeah I think im ok with the jargon in this context.

> Bevy now has the ability to run a depth and/or normal prepass. This means the depth and normal textures will be generated in a render pass that runs before the main pass and can therefore be used during the main pass. This enables various special effects like Screen Space Ambient Occlusion, Temporal Anti Aliasing and many more. These are currently being worked on and should be available in the next release of bevy.

Reviewer 3: We should link to the "What's Next" in the final sentence of this paragraph.

![Edge detection](edge_detection.png)
<p class="release-feature-authors">In the image on the right, green lines are edges detected in the normal texture and blue lines are edges detected in the depth texture</p>

![Edge detection prepass](edge_detection_prepass.png)
<p class="release-feature-authors">The depth and normal textures generated by the prepass</p>

> Unfortunately, the prepass still has performance issues so it's currently disabled by default, but if you need to use it for a specific effect you can simply add the `DepthPrepass` component to your camera.

Reviewer 3: Linking to an issue for the prepass performance issues would be nice for folks to track and help out with.

Reviewer 12: There isn't one right now because it depends on many things that aren't all necessarily prepass related. Pretty much anything that makes rendering faster will also help the prepass.

Reviewer 12: Something like this might help a little more

```suggestion
Using the prepass essentially means rendering everything twice. The prepass itself is much faster since it does a lot less work than the main pass. The result of the prepass can be used to reduce overdraw in the main pass, but if your scene didn't already suffer from overdraw then enabling the prepass will negatively affect performance.  There are many things that can be done to improve this and we will keep working towards this goal. Like with anything performance related, make sure to measure it for your use case and see if it helps or not.

The prepass is still very useful when working on special effects that require a depth or normal texture, so if you want to use it you can simply add the `DepthPrepass` or `NormalPrepass` components to your camera.
```

Reviewer 13: I much prefer this. @cart .

## Shadow Mapping using Prepass Shaders

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @geieredgar</div>

Previously, the shader used for shadow mapping was hard-coded and had no knowledge of the material, only meshes. Now in **Bevy 0.10**, a `Material`'s depth prepass shaders are used for shadow mapping. This means that the shaders used to do the shadow mapping for a `Material` are customizable!

As a bonus, the availability of `Material` information during shadow mapping means that we could instantly enable alpha mask shadows allowing foliage to cast shadows according to the alpha values in their texture rather than only based on their geometry.

![Alpha mask shadows](alpha_mask_shadows.png)

> <p class="release-feature-authors">NVIDIA ORCA Emerald Square scene with alpha mask shadow support</p>

Reviewer 13: @cart - I forgot to make the attribution and license explicitly clear:
```suggestion
<p class="release-feature-authors">[NVIDIA ORCA Emerald Square scene](https://developer.nvidia.com/orca/nvidia-emerald-square) ([CC BY-NC-SA 3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/) with alpha mask shadow support</p>
```

## Improved Android Support

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @slyedoc</div>

![Android emulator running Bevy](android%20emulator.png)

Bevy now runs out of the box on Android on more devices. This was unlocked by waiting for the [`Resumed`](https://docs.rs/winit/0.28/winit/event/enum.Event.html#variant.Resumed) event to create the window instead of doing it on startup, matching the [`onResume()`](https://developer.android.com/guide/components/activities/activity-lifecycle#onresume) callback on Android.

To follow the recommendations on the [`Suspended`](https://docs.rs/winit/0.28/winit/event/enum.Event.html#variant.Suspended) event, Bevy will now exit on receiving that event. This is a temporary solution until Bevy is able to recreate rendering resources when being resumed.

Please test on your devices and report successes or issues you may encounter! There is a known issue around touch position on some devices with software buttons, as winit doesn't expose [yet](https://github.com/rust-windowing/winit/issues/2308) the inset size, only the inner size.

> As this brings Bevy closer to full support of Android, there isn't a need anymore for separated examples for Android and iOS. They have been regrouped in one ["mobile" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples/mobile), and the instructions updated ([for Android](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples#android) and [for iOS](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples#ios)).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
As this brings Bevy closer to full support of Android, there isn't a need anymore for separate examples for Android and iOS. They have been regrouped in one ["mobile" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples/mobile), and the instructions updated ([for Android](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples#android) and [for iOS](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.10.0/examples#ios)).
```

Here is the same example running on iOS!

![iOS emulator running Bevy](ios%20emulator.png)

## Revamped Bloom

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @StarLederer, @JMS55</div>

Bloom has undergone some major changes and now looks better, is easier to control, and has fewer visual artifacts.
In combination with the new tonemapping options, bloom has been much improved since the previous release!

1. In Bevy 0.9, bloom looked like this.
2. Switching the tonemapper to something like `AcesFitted` is already a big improvement.

> 3. in Bevy 0.10, bloom now looks like this. It's much more controlled and less overbearing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. In Bevy 0.10, bloom now looks like this. It's much more controlled and less overbearing.
```

     </div>
     <div style="position: relative;">
        <div style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; background-color: black; color: white; border-radius: 10px 0 10px 0; width: 30px; height: 30px; padding: 2px; box-shadow: 2px 2px 4px rgba(0,0,0,0.3); text-align: center; opacity: 0.8;">5</div>
        <img src="new_bloom_additive.png" style="width: 100%; height: auto;"/>
     </div>
     <div style="position: relative;">
        <div style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; background-color: black; color: white; border-radius: 10px 0 10px 0; width: 30px; height: 30px; padding: 2px; box-shadow: 2px 2px 4px rgba(0,0,0,0.3); text-align: center; opacity: 0.8;">6</div>
        <img src="bloom_example.png" style="width: 100%; height: auto;"/>
     </div>
 </div>

## Distance and Atmospheric Fog

<div class="release-feature-authors">author: Marco Buono (@coreh)</div>

Bevy can now render distance and atmospheric fog effects, bringing a heightened sense of _depth_ and _ambiance_ to your scenes by making objects appear dimmer the further away they are from view.

![The new fog example showcases different fog modes and parameters.](fog.png)

> Fog is controllable per-camera via the new [`FogSettings`] component. Special care has been put in exposing several knobs to give you full artistic control over the look of your fog, including the ability to fade the fog in and out by controlling the alpha channel of the fog color.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Fog is controllable per camera via the new [`FogSettings`] component. Special care has been put into exposing several knobs to give you full artistic control over the look of your fog, including the ability to fade the fog in and out by controlling the alpha channel of the fog color.
```

```rust
commands.spawn((
    Camera3dBundle::default(),
    FogSettings {
        color: Color::rgba(0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 1.0),
        falloff: FogFalloff::Linear { start: 50.0, end: 100.0 },
    },
));
```

> _Exactly how_ fog behaves with regards to distance is controlled via the [`FogFalloff`] enum. All of the “traditional” fog falloff modes from the fixed-function OpenGL 1.x / DirectX 7 days are supported:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
_Exactly how_ fog behaves with regard to distance is controlled via the [`FogFalloff`] enum. All of the “traditional” fog falloff modes from the fixed-function OpenGL 1.x / DirectX 7 days are supported:
```

<text font-family="sans-serif" fill="#FF003D" style="white-space: pre" font-size="10" letter-spacing="0em"><tspan x="61" y="54.6364">density = 2</tspan></text>
<text font-family="sans-serif" fill="#001AFF" style="white-space: pre" font-size="10" letter-spacing="0em"><tspan x="168" y="84.6364">density = 1</tspan></text>
<text font-family="sans-serif" fill="#14FF00" style="white-space: pre" font-size="10" letter-spacing="0em"><tspan x="174" y="121.636">density = 0.5</tspan></text>
<text font-family="sans-serif" fill="currentColor" style="white-space: pre" font-size="12" letter-spacing="0em"><tspan x="161" y="190.864">distance</tspan></text>
<text font-family="sans-serif" transform="translate(10 132) rotate(-90)" fill="currentColor" style="white-space: pre" font-size="12" letter-spacing="0em"><tspan x="0" y="11.8636">fog intensity</tspan></text>
</svg>

Additionally, a more sophisticated `FogFalloff::Atmospheric` mode is available which provides _more physically accurate_ results by taking light `extinction` and `inscattering` into account separately.

> [`DirectionalLight`] influence is also supported for all fog modes via the `directional_light_color` and `directional_light_exponent` parameters, mimicking the light dispersion effect seen on sunny outdoor environments.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
[`DirectionalLight`] influence is also supported for all fog modes via the `directional_light_color` and `directional_light_exponent` parameters, mimicking the light dispersion effect seen in sunny outdoor environments.
```

![The new atmospheric_fog example showcases a terrain with atmospheric fog and directional light influence.](atmospheric-fog.png)

Since directly controlling the non-linear fog falloff parameters “by hand” can be tricky to get right, a number of helper functions based on [meteorological visibility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visibility) are available, such as [`FogFalloff::from_visibility()`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/enum.FogFalloff.html#method.from_visibility):

```rust
FogSettings {
    // objects retain visibility (>= 5% contrast) for up to 15 units
    falloff: FogFalloff::from_visibility(15.0),
    ..default()
}
```

Fog is applied “forward rendering-style” on the PBR fragment shader, instead of as a post-processing effect, which allows it to properly handle semi-transparent meshes.

> The atmospheric fog implementation is largely based on [this great article](https://iquilezles.org/articles/fog/) by Inigo Quilez, Shadertoy co-creator and computer graphics legend. _Thanks for the great write up and inspiration!_

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The atmospheric fog implementation is largely based on [this great article](https://iquilezles.org/articles/fog/) by Inigo Quilez, Shadertoy co-creator, and computer graphics legend. _Thanks for the great write up and inspiration!_
```

* [`AlphaMode::Premultiplied`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/enum.AlphaMode.html#variant.Premultiplied) — Behaves very similarly to [`AlphaMode::Blend`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/enum.AlphaMode.html#variant.Blend), but assumes the color channels have **premultiplied alpha**. Can be used to avoid discolored “outline” artifacts that can occur when using plain alpha-blended textures, or to cleverly create materials that combine additive and regular alpha blending in a single texture, thanks to the fact that for otherwise constant RGB values, `Premultiplied` behaves more like `Blend` for alpha values closer to 1.0, and more like `Add` for alpha values closer to 0.0.

![The new blend_modes example.](blend-modes.png)

**Note:** Meshes using the new blend modes are drawn on the existing `Transparent3d` render phase, and therefore the same _z-sorting considerations/limitations_ from `AlphaMode::Blend` apply.

[`AlphaMode`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/enum.AlphaMode.html
[`StandardMaterial`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/pbr/struct.StandardMaterial.html

## More Tonemapping Choices

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DGriffin91, @JMS55</div>

> Tonemapping is the process of transforming raw HDR information into actual "screen colors". In previous versions of Bevy you had exactly two tonemapping options: Reinhard Luminance or disabled tonemapping. In **Bevy 0.10** we've added a ton of choices!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tonemapping is the process of transforming raw High Dynamic Range (HDR) information into actual "screen colors". In previous versions of Bevy you had exactly two tonemapping options: Reinhard Luminance or none at all. In **Bevy 0.10** we've added a ton of choices!
```

Reviewer 8: For the HDR abbreviation we could do something like this, when the user hovers over HDR it would bring up a little tooltip with the full version.
```html
<abbr title="High Dynamic Range">HDR</abbr>
```

### No Tonemapping

This is generally not recommended as HDR lighting is not intended to be used as color.

![no tonemapping](tm_none.png)

### Reinhard

![reinhard](tm_reinhard.png)

### Reinhard Luminance

This is what we had in previous versions of Bevy. It is still our default algorithm.

![reinhard luminance](tm_reinhard_luminance.png)

> ### ACES Fitted

Reviewer 3: These other tonemapping options would benefit from a one sentence blurb too.

![aces](tm_aces.png)

### AgX

![agx](tm_agx.png)

### SomewhatBoringDisplayTransform

![SomewhatBoringDisplayTransform](tm_sbdt.png)

### TonyMcMapface

Tomasz Stachowiak [recently released](https://twitter.com/h3r2tic/status/1626579257559502850?lang=en) this nice new display transform. In their own words "Tony maps HDR Rec.709 to LDR in a (subjectively) natural way, without messing too much with contrast or look"

![TonyMcMapface](tm_tonymcmapface.png)

### Blender Filmic

From the 3D software package we know and love!

![Blender Filmic](tm_blender_filmic.png)

## Color Grading Control

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DGriffin91</div>

> We've added some basic control over color grading parameters such as exposure, gamma, "pre-tonemapping saturation", and "post-tonemapping saturation". These can be configured per-camera using the new [`ColorGrading`] component.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We've added some basic control over color grading parameters such as exposure, gamma, "pre-tonemapping saturation", and "post-tonemapping saturation". These can be configured per camera using the new [`ColorGrading`] component.
```

[`ColorGrading`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/render/view/struct.ColorGrading.html

### 0.5 Exposure

![0.5 exposure](exposure_005.png)

### 2.25 Exposure

![2.25 exposure](exposure_225.png)

## Parallel Pipelined Rendering

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @hymm, @james7132</div>

![Trace with Pipelined Rendering](pipelined-rendering-trace.png)

On multithreaded platforms, **Bevy 0.10** will now run significantly faster by running simulation and
rendering in parallel. The renderer was rearchitected in [Bevy 0.6](https://bevyengine.org/news/bevy-0-6/#pipelined-rendering-extract-prepare-queue-render)
to enable this, but the final step of actually running them in parallel was not done until now.
There was a bit of tricky work to figure out. The render world has a system that has to run on
the main thread, but the task pool only had the ability to run on the world's thread. So, when we send
the render world to another thread we need to accommodate still running render systems on the main

> thread. So we added the ability to spawn tasks onto the main thread in addition to the world's thread.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
thread. To accomplish this, we added the ability to spawn tasks onto the main thread in addition to the world's thread.
```

![Histogram of Many Foxes Frame Time](pipelined-rendering-histogram.png)

In testing different Bevy examples, the gains were typically in the 10% to 30% range.
As seen in the above histogram, the mean frame time of the "many foxes" stress test
is 1.8ms faster than before.

> To use pipelined rendering, you just need to add the `PipelinedRenderingPlugin`. If you're

Reviewer 3: Link to `PipelinedRenderingPlugin` would be nice here.

using `DefaultPlugins` then it will automatically be added for you on all platforms except
wasm. Bevy does not currently support multithreading on wasm which is needed for this
feature to work. If you are not using `DefaultPlugins` you can add the plugin manually.

## Windows as Entities

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @aceeri, @Weibye, @cart</div>

> In previous versions of Bevy [`Window`] was represented as an ECS resource (contained in the `Windows` resource). In **Bevy 0.10** [`Window`] is now a component (and therefore windows are represented as entities).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In previous versions of Bevy, [`Window`] was represented as an ECS resource (contained in the `Windows` resource). In **Bevy 0.10** [`Window`] is now a component (and therefore windows are represented as entities).
```

This accomplishes a number of goals:

* It opens the doors to representing Windows in Bevy's scene system

> * It exposes Windows to Bevy's powerful ECS queries

Reviewer 12: using a capital W and no inline code here makes it seem a bit like talking about the OS and not like the actual window entities.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
* It exposes `Windows` to Bevy's powerful ECS queries
```

* It provides granular per-window change detection
* Improves the readability/discoverability of creating, using, and closing windows
* Changing the properties of a window is the same for both initializing and modifying. No more `WindowDescriptor` fuss!
* It allows Bevy developers and users to easily attach new component data to windows

```rust
fn create_window(mut commands: Commands) {
    commands.spawn(Window {
        title: "My window :D".to_string(),
        ..default()
    });
}

fn modify_windows(mut windows: Query<&mut Window>) {
    for window in &mut windows {
        window.title = "My changed window! :D".to_string();
    }
}

fn close_windows(mut commands: Commands, windows: Query<Entity, With<Window>>) {
    for entity in &windows {
        commands.entity(entity).despawn();
    }
}
```

[`Window`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/window/struct.Window.html

## Renderer Optimizations

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @danchia, Rob Swain (@superdump), james7132, @kurtkuehnert, @robfm</div>

> Bevy's renderer has had quite a few low hanging fruit for optimization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bevy's renderer was ripe for optimization. So we optimized it!
```

* In [#7639](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7639) by @danchia, we found that even disabled logging has a strong impact on hot loops, netting us 20-50% speedups in the stage.
* In [#6944](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6944) by @james7132, we shrank the core data structures involved in the stage, reducing memory fetches and netting us 9% speedups.
* In [#6885](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6885) by @james7132, we rearchitected our `PhaseItem` and `RenderCommand` infrastructure to combine common operations when fetching component data from the `World`, netting us a 7% speedup.
* In [#7053](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7053) by @james7132, we changed `TrackedRenderPass`'s allocation patterns to minimize branching within these loops, netting a 6% speedup.

> * In [#7084](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7084) by @james7132, we altered how we're fetching resources from the World to minimize use of atomics in the stage, netting a 2% speedup.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* In [#7084](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7084) by @james7132, we altered how we're fetching resources from the World to minimize the use of atomics in the stage, netting a 2% speedup.
```

* In [#6988](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6988) by @kurtkuehnert, we changed our internal resource IDs to use atomically incremented counters instead of UUIDs, reducing the comparison cost of some of the branches in the stage.

One other ongoing development is enabling the render stage to properly parallelize command encoding across multiple threads. Following [#7248](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7248) by @james7132, we now support ingesting externally created `CommandBuffer`s into the render graph, which should allow users to encode GPU commands in parallel and import them into the render graph. This is currently blocked by wgpu, which locks the GPU device when encoding render passes, but we should be able to support parallel command encoding as soon as that's addressed.

> On a similar note, we've made steps to enable higher parallelism in other stages of the rendering pipeline. `PipelineCache` has been a resource that almost every Queue stage system needed to access mutably, but also only rarely needed to be written to. In [#7205](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7205), @danchia changed this to use internal mutability to allow for these systems to parallelize. This doesn't fully allow every system in this stage to parallelize just yet, as there still remains a few common blockers, but it should allow non-conflicting render phases to queue commands at the same time.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
On a similar note, we've made steps to enable higher parallelism in other stages of the rendering pipeline. `PipelineCache` has been a resource that almost every Queue stage system needed to access mutably, but also only rarely needed to be written to. In [#7205](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7205), @danchia changed this to use internal mutability to allow for these systems to parallelize. This doesn't fully allow every system in this stage to parallelize just yet, as there still remain a few common blockers, but it should allow non-conflicting render phases to queue commands at the same time.
```

## Parallelized Transform Propagation and Animation Kinematics

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @james7132</div>

Transform propagation is one of the core systems of any game engine. If you move a parent entity, you expect its children to move in worldspace. Bevy's transform propagation system happens to be one of the largest bottlenecks for multiple systems: rendering, UI, physics, animation, etc. cannot run until it's complete. It's imperative that transform propagation is fast to avoid blocking all of these systems. In **Bevy 0.9** and before, transform propagation has always been single-threaded and always requires a full hierarchy traversal. As worlds got larger, so did the time spent in this key bottleneck. In **Bevy 0.10**, transform propagation leverages the structure of a well-formed hierarchy to fully run over multiple threads. The full performance benefits entirely depend on how the hierarchy is structured and how many CPU cores are available. In our testing, this has made transform propagation in our `many_foxes` benchmark **4 times faster** on our testing hardware.

> If transform propagation can be parallelized, so can forward kinematics for animation. We leveraged the same guaranteed structure of well formed hierarchies to fully parallelize playing skeletal animations. We also enabled a basic entity-path cache lookup to reduce the extra lookups the system was doing. All together, we were able to make the animation player system on the same `many_foxes` benchmark **10 times faster**.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
If transform propagation can be parallelized, so can forward kinematics for animation. We leveraged the same guaranteed structure of well formed hierarchies to fully parallelize playing skeletal animations. We also enabled a basic entity-path cache lookup to reduce the extra lookups the system was doing. Altogether, we were able to make the animation player system on the same `many_foxes` benchmark **10 times faster**.
```

In [#6681](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6681), by tightly packing entity location metadata and avoiding extra memory lookups, we've significantly reduced the overhead when making random query lookups via `Query::get`, seeing up to a 43% reduction in the overhead spent in `Query::get` and `World::get`.

In [#6800](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6800) and [#6902](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6902), we've found that rustc can optimize out compile-time constant branches across function boundaries, moving the branch from runtime to compile time, has resulted in up to a 50% reduction in overhead when using `EntityRef::get`, `EntityMut::insert`, `EntityMut::remove`, and their variants.

In [#6391](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6391), we've reworked `CommandQueue`'s internals to be more CPU-cache friendly, which has shown up to a 37% speedup when encoding and applying commands.

> ## SystemParam Improvements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## `SystemParam` Improvements
```

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @JoJoJet</div>

Central to Bevy's ECS are `SystemParam`s: these types, such as `Query` and `Res`, dictate what a system can and can't do.
Previously, manually creating one required implementing a family of four inseparable traits.
In **Bevy 0.10**, we've [used generic associated types](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6865) to [reduce this to just two traits](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6919): `SystemParam` and `ReadOnlySystemParam`.

Additionally, the `#[derive(SystemParam)]` macro has received a host of miscellaneous usability improvements:

* **Flexibility**: you are no longer forced to declare lifetimes you don't use. Tuple structs are now allowed, and const generics don't break things.
* **Encapsulation**: a long-standing bug has been fixed that leaked the types of private fields. Now, `SystemParam`s can properly encapsulate private world data.

> * **Limitless**: the 16-field limit has been lifted, so you can make your params as ridiculously complex as you want. This is most useful for generated code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Free of limitations**: the 16-field limit has been lifted, so you can make your params as ridiculously complex as you want. This is most useful for generated code.
```

This improves consistency with the other two list items.

> * **Limitless**: the 16-field limit has been lifted, so you can make your params as ridiculously complex as you want. This is most useful for generated code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Unlimited Power**: the 16-field limit has been lifted, so you can make your params as ridiculously complex as you want. This is most useful for generated code.
```

Improves consistency with the items above: both are nouns. I couldn't think of a good single noun so I went for a bit of humor.

Author: Opted for changing the form of the other bullet points. I think "unlimited power" is maybe a bit too dramatic for this :)

in the schedule. Deferring mutations in this way has a few benefits:

* Minimizing world accesses: unlike mutable queries (and resources), deferred mutations are free from data access conflicts, which affords greater parallelizability to systems using this pattern.
* Order independence: when performing idempotent operations (like setting a global flag), deferred mutations allow you to not worry about system execution order.
* Structural mutations: deferred mutations are able to change the structure of the world in ways that `Query` and `ResMut` cannot, such as adding components or spawning and despawning entities.

**Bevy 0.10** adds first-class support for this pattern via the `Deferred` system parameter. This lets you create systems with custom deferred mutation behavior while skipping the overhead associated with `Commands`!

```rust
/// Sends events with a delay, but can run in parallel with other event writers.
pub struct EventBuffer<E>(Vec<E>);

// The `SystemBuffer` trait controls how deferred mutations get applied to the world.

> impl<E> SystemBuffer for EventBuffer<E> { ... }

Reviewer 2: maybe just me, but I'm interested to see what kind of methods are on this trait to understand when/how I could use it. Maybe include just the method signature(s) as well?

Reviewer 3: https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/system/trait.SystemBuffer.html dev docs link, to save a bit of time.

```rust
use bevy::prelude::*;

fn inspect_changes_system<T: Component + Debug>(q: Query<Ref<T>>) {
    // Iterate over each component of type `T` and log its changed status.
    for val in &q {
        if val.is_changed() {
            println!("Value `{val:?}` was last changed at tick {}.", val.last_changed());
        } else {
            println!("Value `{val:?}` is unchanged.");
        }
    }
}
```

We are also deprecating `ChangeTrackers<T>`, which is the old way of inspecting a component's change ticks. This type will be removed in the next version of Bevy.

## Cubic Curves

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @aevyrie</div>

<video controls loop><source  src="cubic_curves.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>
<p class="release-feature-authors">This video shows four kinds of cubic curves being smoothly animated with bezier easing. The curve itself is white, green is velocity, red is acceleration, and blue are the control points that determine the shape of the curve.</p>

> In preparation for UI animation and hand-tweaked animation curves, cubic curves have been added to `bevy_math`.  The implementation provides multiple curves out of the box, useful in various applications:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In preparation for UI animation and hand-tweaked animation curves, cubic curves have been added to `bevy_math`. The implementation provides multiple curves out of the box, useful in various applications:
```

There's still a lot more to be done here: integrating the focus system with a [gamepad-driven UI controls](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/41) solution, cleaning up the data model to [make sure "accessible by default" is a reality](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/7862)), and adding support for remaining features in AccessKit.

Special thanks to `@mcwcampbell`, the lead author of AccessKit, for reviewing our integration and working with us to reduce the number of dependencies upstream, [substantially improving both compile times and final executable size](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1440978453). This is [still a serious challenge on Linux](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1432144117), and so the `accesskit_unix` feature flag is [disabled by default for now](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6874#issuecomment-1433896811).

## Spatial Audio

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @DGriffin91, @harudagondi, @alice-i-cecile</div>

> The library Bevy uses for audio, [`rodio`], contains support for spatial audio. In this version, we now support spatial audio (with certain caveats, like no HRTF and no first class support for `Emitter` and `Listener` components).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The library Bevy uses for audio, [`rodio`], contains support for spatial audio. Bevy 0.10 exposes basic spatial audio. There are  still a few caveats, like no HRTF and no first class support for `Emitter` and `Listener` components.
```

```rust
#import bevy_render::view
```

## Adaptive Batching for Parallel Query Iteration

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @james7132</div>

`Query::par_for_each` has been the tool everyone reaches for when their queries get too big to run single-threaded. Got 100,000 entities running around on your screen? No problem, `Query::par_for_each` chunks it up into smaller batches and distributes the workload over multiple threads. However, in **Bevy 0.9** and before, `Query::par_for_each` required callers to provide a batch size to help tune these batches for maximum performance. This rather opaque knob often resulted in users just randomly picking a value and rolling with it, or fine tuning the value based on their development machines. Unfortunately, the most effective value is dependent on the runtime environment (i.e. how many logical cores does a player's computer have) and the state of the ECS World (i.e. how many entities are matched?). Ultimately most users of the API just chose a flat number and lived with the results, good or bad.

```rust
// 0.9
const QUERY_BATCH_SIZE: usize = 32;

query.par_for_each(QUERY_BATCH_SIZE, |mut component| {
   // ...
});
```

> In 0.10, you no longer need to provide a batch size! If you use [`Query::par_iter`], Bevy will automatically evaluate the state of the World and task pools and select a batch size using a heuristic to ensure sufficient parallelism, without incurring too much overhead. This makes parallel queries as easy to use as normal single-threaded queries! While great for most typical use cases, these heuristics may not be suitable for every workload, so we've provided an escape hatch for those who need finer control over the workload distribution. In the future, we may further tune the backing heuristics to try to get the default to be closer to optimal in these workloads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 0.10, you no longer need to provide a batch size! If you use [`Query::par_iter`], Bevy will automatically evaluate the state of the World and task pools and select a batch size [using a heuristic](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/43ea6f239deefd7a497da6ef581a05a63a278605/crates/bevy_ecs/src/query/par_iter.rs#L24) to ensure sufficient parallelism, without incurring too much overhead. This makes parallel queries as easy to use as normal single-threaded queries! While great for most typical use cases, these heuristics may not be suitable for every workload, so we've provided an escape hatch for those who need finer control over the workload distribution. In the future, we may further tune the backing heuristics to try to get the default to be closer to optimal in these workloads.
```

Reviewer 3: This was sufficiently interesting to me that I wanted to know more, so I figured others would appreciate a link.

```rust
// 0.10
query.par_iter().for_each(|component| {
   // ...
});

> // Fairly easy to convert from a single threaded for_each. Just change iter to par_iter!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
// Fairly easy to convert from a single-threaded for_each. Just change iter to par_iter!
```

These abstractions were introduced in [#6404](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6404), [#7381](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7381) and [#7568](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7568).

## Cylinder Shape

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @JayPavlinas, @rparrett, @davidhof</div>

The cylinder shape primitive has joined our zoo of built-in shapes!

![primitive shapes](primitive_shapes.png)

## Subdividable Plane Shape

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @woodroww</div>

Bevy's [`Plane`] shape can now be subdivided any number of times.

![plane](plane.png)

[`Plane`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/prelude/shape/struct.Plane.html

## Camera Output Modes

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @robtfm</div>

> The [camera-driven](/news/bevy-0-8/#camera-driven-rendering) post-processing features [added in Bevy 0.9](/news/bevy-0-9/#hdr-post-processing-tonemapping-and-bloom) add intuitive control over post processing across multiple cameras in a scene, but there [were a few corner cases](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7490) that didn't _quite_ fit into the hard-coded camera output model. And there were some bugs and limitations related to double buffered target texture sources of truth being incorrect across cameras and MSAA's sampled texture not containing what it should under some circumstances.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The [camera-driven](/news/bevy-0-8/#camera-driven-rendering) post-processing features [added in Bevy 0.9](/news/bevy-0-9/#hdr-post-processing-tonemapping-and-bloom) add intuitive control over post-processing across multiple cameras in a scene, but there [were a few corner cases](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7490) that didn't _quite_ fit into the hard-coded camera output model. And there were some bugs and limitations related to double- buffered target texture sources of truth being incorrect across cameras and MSAA's sampled texture not containing what it should under some circumstances.
```

**Bevy 0.10** adds a [`CameraOutputMode`] field to [`Camera`], which gives Bevy app developers the ability to manually configure exactly how (and if) a [`Camera`]'s render results should be written to the final output texture:

```rust
// Configure the camera to write to the final output texture
camera.output_mode = CameraOutputMode::Write {
    // Do not blend with the current state of the output texture
    blend_state: None,
    // Clear the output texture
    color_attachment_load_op: LoadOp::Clear(Default::default()),
};

// Configure the camera to skip writing to the final output texture
// This can save a pass when there are multiple cameras, and can be useful for

> // some post processing situations

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
// some post-processing situations
```

```

Much easier to understand! In previous Bevy versions, "inherited visibility" and "hidden" were essentially the only two options. Now entities can opt to be visible, even if their parent is hidden!

[`Visibility`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/render/view/enum.Visibility.html
[`Entity`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/entity/index.html

## `AsBindGroup` Storage Buffers

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @IceSentry, @AndrewB330</div>

[`AsBindGroup`] is a useful Bevy trait that [makes it very easy to pass data into shaders](/news/bevy-0-8/#new-material-system).

**Bevy 0.10** expands this with support for "storage buffer bindings", which are very useful when passing in large / unbounded chunks of data:

```rust
#[derive(AsBindGroup)]
struct CoolMaterial {
    #[uniform(0)]
    color: Color,
    #[texture(1)]
    #[sampler(2)]
    color_texture: Handle<Image>,
    #[storage(3)]
    values: Vec<f32>,
    #[storage(4, read_only, buffer)]
    buffer: Buffer,
}
```

[`AsBindGroup`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/render/render_resource/trait.AsBindGroup.html

## `ExtractComponent` Derive

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @torsteingrindvik</div>

> To pass component data from the "main app" to the "render app" for [pipelined rendering](#parallel-pipelined-rendering), we run an "extract step". The [`ExtractComponent`] trait is used to copy data over. In previous versions of Bevy you had to implement it manually, but now you can derive it!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
To pass component data from the "main app" to the "render app" for [pipelined rendering](#parallel-pipelined-rendering), we run an "extract step". The [`ExtractComponent`] trait is used to copy data over. In previous versions of Bevy, you had to implement it manually, but now you can derive it!
```

* Reflected [`List`] types now have `insert` and `remove` operations
* Reflected [`Map`] types now have the `remove` operation
* Reflected generic types now automatically implement [`Reflect`] if the generics also implement Reflect. No need to add manual `T: Reflect` bounds!
* Component Reflection now uses [`EntityRef`] / [`EntityMut`] instead of both [`World`] and [`Entity`], which allows it to be used in more scenarios
* The Reflection deserializer now avoids unnecessarily cloning strings in some scenarios!

[`std::collections::VecDeque`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/vec_deque/struct.VecDeque.html
[`List`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/reflect/trait.List.html
[`Map`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/reflect/trait.Map.html
[`Reflect`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/reflect/trait.Reflect.html
[`EntityRef`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/world/struct.EntityRef.html
[`EntityMut`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/world/struct.EntityMut.html
[`World`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html

## Upgraded Taffy To 0.3

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @ickshonpe, @rparret</div>

> [Taffy](https://crates.io/crates/taffy) is the library we use to compute layouts for `bevy_ui`. Taffy 0.2 significantly improves the performance of nested UIs. Our `many_buttons` example is now 8% faster. More highly nested UIs should see even bigger gains! Taffy 0.3 adds some nice API tweaks (and also a grid layout feature, which we have disabled for now as it still needs some integration work).

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
[Taffy](https://crates.io/crates/taffy) is the library we use to compute layouts for `bevy_ui`. Taffy 0.2 significantly improves the performance of nested UIs (our `many_buttons` example is now 8% faster and more deeply nested UIs should see even bigger gains!). It also brings support for the [gap](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/gap) property which makes it easier to creates UI with evenly spaced items. Taffy 0.3 adds some nice API tweaks (and also a grid layout feature, which we have disabled for now as it still needs some integration work).
```

## Relative Cursor Position

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Pietrek14</div>

We've added a new [`RelativeCursorPosition`] UI component, which when added to a UI entity tracks the cursor position relative to the node. `Some((0, 0))` represents the top-left corner of the node, `Some((1,1))` represents the bottom-right corner of the node, and `None` represents the cursor being "outside of the node".

```rust
commands.spawn((
    NodeBundle::default(),
    RelativeCursorPosition::default(),
));
```

[`RelativeCursorPosition`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ui/struct.RelativeCursorPosition.html

## Const Bevy UI Defaults

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @james-j-obrien</div>

> Bevy uses the [`Default`] trait a lot to make it easy to construct types. Bevy UI types generally implement [`Default`]. However it has one downside (which is fundamental to Rust): [`Default`] cannot be used in `const` contexts ([yet!](https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2022/07/27/keyword-generics.html)). To enable UI layout config to be defined as constants, we've added `DEFAULT` associated constants to most of the Bevy UI types. For example, you can use `Style::DEFAULT` to define a const style:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Bevy uses the [`Default`] trait a lot to make it easy to construct types. Bevy UI types generally implement [`Default`]. However, it has one downside (which is fundamental to Rust): [`Default`] cannot be used in `const` contexts ([yet!](https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2022/07/27/keyword-generics.html)). To enable UI layout config to be defined as constants, we've added `DEFAULT` associated constants to most of the Bevy UI types. For example, you can use `Style::DEFAULT` to define a const style:
```

```rust
const COOL_STYLE: Style = Style {
    size: Size::width(Val::Px(200.0)),
    border: UiRect::all(Val::Px(2.0)),
    ..Style::DEFAULT
};
```

[`Default`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html

## Iterating through a World's Entities

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @james7132</div>

> In **Bevy 0.9**, `World::iter_entities` allows users to get an iterator over all of the entities in the `World` in `Entity` form. In **Bevy 0.10**, this has been changed to be an iterator over `EntityRef`, which gives full read-only access to all of the entity's components instead of just getting its ID. Its new implementation should also be significantly faster than fetching the `EntityRef` by hand (though note that a `Query` will still be faster if you know the exact components you're looking for). This gives users free reign to arbitrarily read any entity data from the World, and may see use in scripting language integrations and reflection-heavy workflows.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In **Bevy 0.9**, `World::iter_entities` allows users to get an iterator over all of the entities in the `World` in `Entity` form. In **Bevy 0.10**, this has been changed to be an iterator over `EntityRef`, which gives full read-only access to all of the entity's components instead of just getting its ID. Its new implementation should also be significantly faster than fetching the `EntityRef` by hand (though note that a `Query` will still be faster if you know the exact components you're looking for). This gives users free rein to arbitrarily read any entity data from the World, and may see use in scripting language integrations and reflection-heavy workflows.
```

[`Commands`] are "deferred ECS" operations. They enable developers to define custom ECS operations that are applied after a parallel system has finished running. Many [`Commands`] ran on individual entities, but this pattern was a bit cumbersome:

```rust
struct MyCustomCommand(Entity);

impl Command for MyCustomCommand {
    fn write(self, world: &mut World) {
        // do something with the entity at self.0
    }
}

let id = commands.spawn(SpriteBundle::default()).id();
commmands.add(MyCustomCommand(id));
```

To solve this, in **Bevy 0.10** we added the [`EntityCommand`] trait. This allows the command to be ergonomically applied to spawned entities:

```rust
struct MyCustomCommand;

impl EntityCommand for MyCustomCommand {
    fn write(self, id: Entity, world: &mut World) {
        // do something with the given entity id
    }
}

commands.spawn(SpriteBundle::default()).add(MyCustomCommand);
```

[`EntityCommand`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/system/trait.EntityCommand.html
[`Commands`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Commands.html

## Pixel Perfect Example

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Ian-Yy</div>

> We now have a new ["pixel perfect" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.10.0/examples/2d/pixel_perfect.rs) that illustrates how to set up pixel perfect sprites. It uses a cute new Bevy logo sprite!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We now have a new ["pixel perfect" example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.10.0/examples/2d/pixel_perfect.rs) that illustrates how to set up pixel-perfect sprites. It uses a cute new Bevy logo sprite!
```

![text layout](text_layout.png)

## CI Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf</div>

We take CI pretty seriously in Bevy land and we're always on the lookout for new ways to make our lives better. We made a number of nice improvements this cycle:

* We now set an MSRV (minimum supported Rust version) for the `bevy` crate and we have a CI job that checks the MSRV
* CI gives new contributors a friendly welcome message!
* CI now asks for a migration guide when a PR is labeled as a breaking change and no migration guide is present

## The First Subject Matter Expert Release

This was our first release using our new [Subject Matter Expert (SME) system](/news/scaling-bevy-development/). We merged an absolutely massive amount of changes, and this was _despite_ our Project Lead `@cart` being away for about a month for Christmas and snowboarding vacations. We maintained a high quality bar and built amazing things. Suffice it to say the future is looking bright (and sustainable)! Stay tuned for more SME appointments in more areas.

## What's Next?

> * **Asset System Evolution**: We've made good progress on the [next iteration of the Bevy Asset System](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/discussions/3972), which will add the ability to preprocess assets and improve the flexibilty and usability of the asset system.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* **Asset System Evolution**: We've made good progress on the [next iteration of the Bevy Asset System](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/discussions/3972), which will add the ability to preprocess assets and improve the flexibility and usability of the asset system.
```

* **Better plugins:** Clearer and more standardized tools for [adapting third-party plugins to your app's unique architecture](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2160), eliminating [order-dependence in their initialization](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/1255) and defining [dependencies](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/69) between them.
* **Pull `!Send` data out of the `World`:** storing non thread-safe data in a structure designed to be sent across threads has caused us no end of headaches. We plan on pulling these out into the `App`, resolving a major blocker for a first-class [multiple worlds](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/43) design.
* **Timestamp window and input events:** As discussed in [#5984](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/5984), tracking the exact timing of input events is essential to ensuring that event ordering and timing can be precisely reconstructed.
* **Opt-out change detection:** improve performance for tiny components by [turning off change detection at compile or run-time](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/4882).

> 

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
 * **Comprehensive Animation Composition:** Supporting non-transitional animation composition (i.e. arbitrary weighted blending of animations). For more complete information, see the [RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/51).
```

Reviewer 3: Should we also mention spline-based animation blending?

Reviewer 15: Might want to hold off on that a bit, since that involves some design discussions over how animation assets are structured, preprocessed, and stored on disk/memory. The math is there, but the finer specifics on the rest of it still has a few questions to be answered.

> 

Reviewer 15: Probably should also mention the preliminary design phase for the editor should be starting soon. Ideally within the 0.11 release cycle, even if there may be not tangible MVP until a later release.

Reviewer 3: Link to requirements gathering: https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/discussions/7100

Check out the [**Bevy 0.11 Milestone**](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/milestone/11) for an up-to-date list of current work being considered for **Bevy 0.11**.

> ## Support Bevy

Reviewer 12: Should this mention the new sponsorship pledge?

Reviewer 3: https://bevyengine.org/sponsorship-pledge/

Author: I think that might be a bit too much context for this. The linked donate page already links to the sponsorship pledge at an appropriate time.  I'd like the messaging to be short and sweet, and I'd prefer the focus to be on the "donate" link :)

Sponsorships help make our work on Bevy sustainable. If you believe in Bevy's mission, consider [sponsoring us](/community/donate) ... every bit helps!

<a class="button button--pink header__cta" href="/community/donate">Donate <img class="button__icon" src="/assets/heart.svg" alt="heart icon"></a>

> ## Contributors

Reviewer 12: This might be a good place to link the new people page

Reviewer 3: https://bevyengine.org/community/people/

+++
title = "Bevy 0.10"
date = 2023-03-04
[extra]
author = "Bevy Contributors"
image = "ruins.png"
show_image = true

> image_subtitle = "Ruins scene illustrating Bevy's new material blend modes and fog"

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
image_subtitle = "Ruins scene illustrating Bevy's new material blend modes and fog. Based on original scene by Casey Hardy (CC Attribution)"
```

The prepass is still very useful when working on special effects that require a depth or normal texture, so if you want to use it you can simply add the `DepthPrepass` or `NormalPrepass` components to your camera.

## Shadow Mapping using Prepass Shaders

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @geieredgar</div>

Previously, the shader used for shadow mapping was hard-coded and had no knowledge of the material, only meshes. Now in **Bevy 0.10**, a `Material`'s depth prepass shaders are used for shadow mapping. This means that the shaders used to do the shadow mapping for a `Material` are customizable!

As a bonus, the availability of `Material` information during shadow mapping means that we could instantly enable alpha mask shadows allowing foliage to cast shadows according to the alpha values in their texture rather than only based on their geometry.

![Alpha mask shadows](alpha_mask_shadows.png)

> <p class="release-feature-authors">[NVIDIA ORCA Emerald Square scene](https://developer.nvidia.com/orca/nvidia-emerald-square) ([CC BY-NC-SA 3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/)) with alpha mask shadow support</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div style="font-size: 1.0rem" class="release-feature-authors"><a href="https://developer.nvidia.com/orca/nvidia-emerald-square">NVIDIA ORCA Emerald Square scene</a> (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/">CC BY-NC-SA 3.0</a>) with alpha mask shadow support</div>
```
markdown is not expended inside html tag

![reinhard](tm_reinhard.png)

### Reinhard Luminance

A popular method similar to normal Reinhard that incorporates luminance. It adapts to the amount of light in a scene. This is what we had in previous versions of Bevy. It is still our default algorithm, but this will likely change in the future. Hues shift. Brights don't desaturate much at all across the spectrum.

![reinhard luminance](tm_reinhard_luminance.png)

### ACES Fitted

An extremely popular algorithm used in film and industry (ex: ACES is the default Unreal tonemapping algorithm). When people say "filmic", this is often what they mean.

Not neutral, has a very specific aesthetic, intentional and dramatic hue shifting.
Bright greens and reds turn orange. Bright blues turn magenta. Significantly increased contrast. Brights desaturate across the spectrum.

![aces](tm_aces.png)

### AgX

Very neutral. Image is somewhat desaturated when compared to other transforms. Little to no hue shifting. Subtle [Abney shifting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abney_effect). [Created by Troy Sobotka](https://github.com/sobotka/AgX)

![agx](tm_agx.png)

> ### SomewhatBoringDisplayTransform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Somewhat Boring Display Transform
```
a long unbreakable title means the ToC has a scrollbar

Author: Ooh good call!

* Structural mutations: deferred mutations are able to change the structure of the world in ways that `Query` and `ResMut` cannot, such as adding components or spawning and despawning entities.

**Bevy 0.10** adds first-class support for this pattern via the `Deferred` system parameter, which accepts a [`SystemBuffer`] trait impl. This lets you create systems with custom deferred mutation behavior while skipping the overhead associated with `Commands`!

```rust
/// Sends events with a delay, but can run in parallel with other event writers.
pub struct EventBuffer<E>(Vec<E>);

// The `SystemBuffer` trait controls how deferred mutations get applied to the world.
impl<E> SystemBuffer for EventBuffer<E> { ... }

fn my_system(mut events: Deferred<EventBuffer<MyEvent>>) {
    // Queue up an event to get sent when commands are applied.
    events.0.push(MyEvent);
}
```

Note that this feature should be used with care -- despite the potential performance benefits, inappropriate usage can actually _worsen_ performance. Any time you perform an optimization, make sure you check that it actually speeds things up!

> [`SystemBuffer`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/system/trait.SystemBuffer.html 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`SystemBuffer`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/ecs/system/trait.SystemBuffer.html
```

![text layout](text_layout.png)

## CI Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf</div>

We take CI pretty seriously in Bevy land and we're always on the lookout for new ways to make our lives better. We made a number of nice improvements this cycle:

* We now set an MSRV (minimum supported Rust version) for the `bevy` crate and we have a CI job that checks the MSRV
* CI gives new contributors a friendly welcome message!
* CI now asks for a migration guide when a PR is labeled as a breaking change and no migration guide is present

## The First Subject Matter Expert Release

This was our first release using our new [Subject Matter Expert (SME) system](/news/scaling-bevy-development/). We merged an absolutely massive amount of changes, and this was _despite_ our Project Lead `@cart` being away for about a month for Christmas and snowboarding vacations. We maintained a high quality bar and built amazing things. Suffice it to say the future is looking bright (and sustainable)! Stay tuned for more SME appointments in more areas.

> ## What's Next?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## <a name="what-s-next"></a>What's Next?
```
this anchor means that linking to this works even in non-sola rendered context. we need it to pass the markdown linter

1. Construct a schedule, that stores whatever complex logic you want to run.
2. Store that schedule inside of a resource.
3. In an exclusive system, perform any arbitrary Rust logic you want to decide if and how your schedule runs.
4. Temporarily take the schedule out of the [`World`], run it on the rest of the world to mutate both the schedule and the world, and then put it back in.

With the addition of the new [`Schedules`] resource and the `world.run_schedule()` API it's more ✨ ergonomic ✨ than ever.

```rust
// A Schedule!
let mut my_schedule = Schedule::new();
schedule.add_system(my_system);

// A label for our new Schedule!
#[derive(ScheduleLabel, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone)]
struct MySchedule;

// An exclusive system to run this schedule
fn run_my_schedule(world: &mut World) {
    while very_complex_logic() {
        world.run_schedule(MySchedule);
    }
}

// Behold the ergonomics!
app
    .add_schedule(MySchedule, my_schedule)
    .add_system(run_my_schedule);
```

Bevy uses this pattern for five rather different things in **Bevy 0.10**:

1. **Startup systems:** these now live in their own schedule, which is run once at the start of the app.

> 2. **Fixed timestep systems:** another schedule?! The exclusive system that runs this schedule accumulates time, running a while loop that repeatedly runs `CoreSchedule::FixedTimestep` until all of the accumulated time has been spent.

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
2. **Fixed timestep systems:** another schedule?! The exclusive system that runs this schedule accumulates time, running a while loop that repeatedly runs `CoreSchedule::FixedUpdate` until all of the accumulated time has been spent.
```

            animation_player
                .play_with_transition(animations.run.clone(), Duration::from_secs_f32(0.5))
                .repeat();
        }
    }
}
```

[`AnimationPlayer`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/animation/struct.AnimationPlayer.html
[`play_with_transition`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10/bevy/animation/struct.AnimationPlayer.html#method.play_with_transition

## Improved Android Support

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @slyedoc</div>

![Android emulator running Bevy](android%20emulator.png)

Bevy now runs out of the box on Android on more devices. This was unlocked by waiting for the [`Resumed`](https://docs.rs/winit/0.28/winit/event/enum.Event.html#variant.Resumed) event to create the window instead of doing it on startup, matching the [`onResume()`](https://developer.android.com/guide/components/activities/activity-lifecycle#onresume) callback on Android.

To follow the recommendations on the [`Suspended`](https://docs.rs/winit/0.28/winit/event/enum.Event.html#variant.Suspended) event, Bevy will now exit on receiving that event. This is a temporary solution until Bevy is able to recreate rendering resources when being resumed.

> Please test on your devices and report successes or issues you may encounter! There is a known issue around touch position on some devices with software buttons, as winit doesn't expose [yet](https://github.com/rust-windowing/winit/issues/2308) the inset size, only the inner size.

Reviewer 18: ```suggestion
Please test on your devices and report successes or issues you may encounter! There is a known issue around touch position on some devices with software buttons, as winit doesn't expose ([yet](https://github.com/rust-windowing/winit/issues/2308)) the inset size, only the inner size.
```

[`GamepadEvent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.10.0/bevy/input/gamepad/enum.GamepadEvent.html

## Input Method Editor (IME) Support

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf</div>

[`Window`] can now configure IME support using `ime_enabled` and `ime_position`, which enables the use of "dead keys", which add support for French, Pinyin, etc:

<video controls loop><source  src="ime.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

## Reflection Paths: Enums and Tuples

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV</div>

Bevy's "reflection paths" enable navigating Rust values using a simple (and dynamic) string syntax. **Bevy 0.10** expands this system by adding support for tuples and enums in reflect paths:

```rust
#[derive(Reflect)]
struct MyStruct {
  data: Data,
  some_tuple: (u32, u32),
}

#[derive(Reflect)]
enum Data {
  Foo(u32, u32),
  Bar(bool)
}

let x = MyStruct {
  data: Data::Foo(123),
  some_tuple: (10, 20),
};

assert_eq!(*x.path::<u32>("data.1").unwrap(), 123);
assert_eq!(*x.path::<u32>("some_tuple.0").unwrap(), 10);
```

## Pre-Parsed Reflection Paths

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV, @james7132 </div>

> Reflection paths enable a lot of interesting and dynamic editor scenarios, but they do have a downside: calling `path()` requires parsing strings every time. To solve this problem we added [`ParsedPath`], which enables pre-parsing paths and then reusing those results on each access:

Reviewer 18: The [`ParsedPath`] link is missing a definition/destination.

* **Better plugins:** Clearer and more standardized tools for [adapting third-party plugins to your app's unique architecture](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2160), eliminating [order-dependence in their initialization](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/1255) and defining [dependencies](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/69) between them.
* **Pull `!Send` data out of the `World`:** storing non thread-safe data in a structure designed to be sent across threads has caused us no end of headaches. We plan on pulling these out into the `App`, resolving a major blocker for a first-class [multiple worlds](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/43) design.
* **Timestamp window and input events:** As discussed in [#5984](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/5984), tracking the exact timing of input events is essential to ensuring that event ordering and timing can be precisely reconstructed.
* **Opt-out change detection:** improve performance for tiny components by [turning off change detection at compile or run-time](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/4882).

> * **Comprehensive Animation Composition:** Supporting non-transitional animation composition (i.e. arbitrary weighted blending of animations). For more complete information, see the [RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/51).
> Check out the [**Bevy 0.11 Milestone**](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/milestone/11) for an up-to-date list of current work being considered for **Bevy 0.11**.

Reviewer 18: ```suggestion
* **Comprehensive Animation Composition:** Supporting non-transitional animation composition (i.e. arbitrary weighted blending of animations). For more complete information, see the [RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/51).

Check out the [**Bevy 0.11 Milestone**](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/milestone/11) for an up-to-date list of current work being considered for **Bevy 0.11**.
```

I don't think the milestone sentence is intended to be a part of the last list item?

**System sets** are named collections of systems that share system configuration across all of their members. This is both distributive and additive: ordering systems relative to a system set applies that ordering to _all_ systems in that set, in addition to any configuration on each individual system.

Let's jump right in to what this would look like.

```rust
// System set types are used to provide stable, typed identifiers
// for groups of systems, allowing external systems to order themselves
// without being aware of internal details.
// Each variant of this enum is a distinct system set.
#[derive(SystemSet, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone)]
enum PhysicsSet {
    Forces,
    Kinematics,
    CollisionDetection
}

app
    // .with_run_criteria -> .run_if <3
    // Note that in this case we're modifying this single `gravity` system, not the entire `PhysicsSet::Forces`
    // as this is a method on a single system.
    // The order of these method calls doesn't matter!
   .add_system(gravity.in_set(PhysicsSet::Forces).run_if(gravity_enabled))
    // Add multiple systems at once with add_systems!    

>     .add_systems(
>         (apply_acceleration, apply_velocity)
>             // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
>             .chain()
>             .in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics)),

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    .add_systems(
        (apply_acceleration, apply_velocity)
            // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
            .chain()
            .in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics),
    )
```

Small mistake in my last suggestion :)

Author: Nice catch :)

**System sets** are named collections of systems that share system configuration across all of their members. This is both distributive and additive: ordering systems relative to a system set applies that ordering to _all_ systems in that set, in addition to any configuration on each individual system.

Let's jump right in to what this would look like.

```rust
// System set types are used to provide stable, typed identifiers
// for groups of systems, allowing external systems to order themselves
// without being aware of internal details.
// Each variant of this enum is a distinct system set.
#[derive(SystemSet, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, Clone)]
enum PhysicsSet {
    Forces,
    Kinematics,
    CollisionDetection
}

app
    // .with_run_criteria -> .run_if <3
    // Note that in this case we're modifying this single `gravity` system, not the entire `PhysicsSet::Forces`
    // as this is a method on a single system.
    // The order of these method calls doesn't matter!
   .add_system(gravity.in_set(PhysicsSet::Forces).run_if(gravity_enabled))

>     // Add multiple systems at once with add_systems!    
>     .add_systems((
>         apply_acceleration,
>         apply_velocity
>     // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
>     ).chain().in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics))

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    // Add multiple systems at once with add_systems!    
    .add_systems(
        (apply_acceleration, apply_velocity)
    // Quickly order a list of systems to run one after the next by using .chain()
            .chain()
            .in_set(PhysicsSet::Kinematics)),
```

We should make sure this looks like something rustfmt would actually produce.

Similarly, state transitions can be scheduled manually, one type at a time, in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.

What will you do with this much power? We're keen to find out!

## It's All Schedules? Managing complex control flow

But what if you want to do something _weird_ with your schedule. Something non-linear, or branching, or looping. What should you reach for?

It turns out, Bevy already _had_ a great tool for this: schedules run inside of an exclusive system. The idea is pretty simple:

1. Construct a schedule, that stores whatever complex logic you want to run.
2. Store that schedule inside of a resource.
3. In an exclusive system, perform any arbitrary Rust logic you want to decide if and how your schedule runs.
4. Temporarily take the schedule out of the world, run it on the rest of the world to mutate both the schedule and the world, and then put it back in.

With the addition of the new `Schedules` resource and the `world.run_schedule(schedule_label: impl ScheduleLabel)`API it's more :sparkles: ergonomic :sparkles: than ever.

> ```rust!
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust
```

Follow the bread crumbs starting at [`CoreSchedule`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSchedule.html) for more info.

## Simpler Run Conditions

Systems may have any number of run conditions (and inherit them from the sets they belong to), but will only run if all of their run conditions return `true`.
Run criteria have been renamed to the clearer **run conditions**, which can be constructed out of any read-only system that returns `bool`.

With a new blessed pattern for complex control flow, we can finally get rid of looping run criteria. [`ShouldRun::YesAndCheckAgain`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/ecs/schedule/enum.ShouldRun.html) was not exactly straightforward to reason about, either for engine devs or users. It's always a bad sign when your bool-like enums have four possible values.

If you crave that powerful, complex control flow: use the "schedules in exclusive systems" pattern listed above.
For the other 99% of use cases, enjoy the simpler `bool`-based run conditions.

> ```rust!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust
```

// Let's make our own run condition
fn game_end_condition(query: Query<&Player>, score: Res<Score>) -> bool {
    let player = query.single();
    player.is_alive() && score.0 > 9000
}

app.add_system(win_game.run_if(game_end_condition));
```

Run conditions can serve as a lightweight optimization tool: each one is evaluated only each schedule update, and shared across the system set. Reducing the number of tasks spawned can really add up. Like always though: benchmark!

> Bevy 0.10 is shipping with a lovely collection of built-in [common run conditions](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/common_conditions/index.html). Courtesy of [#6587 by `@maniwani`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587), [#7579 by `@inodentry`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7579)and [#7806 by `@jakobhellermann`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7806), you can quickly check if there are events to process, changes to resources, input states and more.

Reviewer 3: A pair of very nice timer-based run conditions have been added in https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7866

    1. To set the next state, simply mutate the value of the `NextState<S>` resource.
2. Run conditions can read the value of the `State<S>` resource.
    1. Systems with the `in_state(AppState::InGame)` run condition will only run if the value of the `State<AppState>` resource equals `AppState::InGame`.
3. Check for and apply state transitions as part of the `apply_state_transitions<S>` exclusive system. When transitioning between states:
    1. First run the `OnExit(S::VariantLeft)` schedule for the state you're leaving.
    2. Then run the `OnEnter(S::VariantEntered)` schedule.
    3. These schedules are stored in the `Schedules` resource, and can be looked up via their `ScheduleLabel`.
4. When the user calls `app.add_state:<s>()`:
    1. Initialize an `OnEnter` and an `OnExit` schedule for each variant of our state type `S`.
    2. Configure the `OnUpdate(S::Variant)` system set to belong to `CoreSet::Update` and only run when `State<S>` is `S::Variant`.
    3. Add a copy of `apply_state_transitions<S>` to `CoreSet::ApplyStateTransitions`.
    4. Set the starting state of `S` using its `Default` trait.

As a user though, you don't have to worry about those details:

> ```rust!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust
```

Well, I'm glad you asked, rhetorical skeptic. To reduce this chaos (and ease migration), Bevy 0.10 comes with a brand new collection of system sets with the default plugins: [`CoreSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSet.html), [`StartupSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.StartupSet.html) and [`RenderSet`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/render/enum.RenderSet.html). The similarity of their names to [`CoreStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.CoreStage.html), [`StartupStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/app/enum.StartupStage.html) and [`RenderStage`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.9.1/bevy/render/enum.RenderStage.html) is not a coincidence: there are command flush points between each set, and existing systems have been migrated directly.

Some parts of the stage-centric architecture were appealing: a clear high level structure, coordination on flush points (to reduce excessive bottlenecks) and good default behavior.
To keep those bits (while excising the frustrating ones), we've introduced the concept of **base sets**, added in [#7466](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7466) by `@cart`. Base sets are system sets, except:

> 1. Every system (but not every system set) must belong to exactly one base set.

Reviewer 10: I thought that systems can have no base set:
```
.add_system(
    no_base_set
        .no_default_base_set(),
)
```

Author: Yup this is true. Schedules also don't have a "default base set" unless one is set, and this is still valid. We should rephrase this.

By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.
Let us know how it works out for you!

## Polish Matters

As part of this work, we've taken the time to listen to our users and fix some small but high-impact things about how scheduling works.

Compare the following options for adding and ordering four systems, one after the other.

:coffee: **Enterprise-grade** :coffee::

```rust
#[derive(SystemSet, PartialEq, Eq, Clone, Copy, Hash, Debug)]
#[allow(missing_docs)]
pub enum Step {
    A,
    B,
    C,
    D
}

app
    .configure_set(Step::A.before(Step::B))
    .configure_set(Step::B.before(Step::C))
    .configure_set(Step::C.before(Step::D))
    .add_system(a.in_set(Step::A))
    .add_system(b.in_set(Step::B))
    .add_system(c.in_set(Step::C))
    .add_system(d.in_set(Step::D));
```

:weary: **Tedious** :weary::

```rust
app
    .add_system(a.before(b))
    .add_system(b.before(c))
    .add_system(c.before(d))
    .add_system(d);
```

:sparkles: **Ergonomic** :sparkles::

```rust

>     app.add_systems((a, b, c, d).chain());

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
app.add_systems((a, b, c, d).chain());
```

* **Better plugins:** Clearer and more standardized tools for [adapting third-party plugins to your app's unique architecture](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/2160), eliminating [order-dependence in their initialization](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/1255) and defining [dependencies](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/69) between them.
* **Pull `!Send` data out of the `World`:** storing non thread-safe data in a structure designed to be sent across threads has caused us no end of headaches. We plan on pulling these out into the `App`, resolving a major blocker for a first-class [multiple worlds](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/43) design.
* **Timestamp window and input events:** As discussed in [#5984](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/5984), tracking the exact timing of input events is essential to ensuring that event ordering and timing can be precisely reconstructed.
* **[Opt-out change detection](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/4882):** improve performance for tiny components by turning off change detection at compile or run-time.

> 

Reviewer 15: It might be worth linking the 0.11 milestone here. We already have 50+ some issues and PRs on it.

Thanks to the fantastic work of our ECS team, the hotly awaited ["stageless" scheduling RFC](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/blob/main/rfcs/45-stageless.md) has been implemented!

Schedule v3 is the culmination of significant design and implementation work. Scheduling APIs are a central and defining part of the Bevy developer experience, so we had to be very thoughtful and meticulous about this next evolution of the API. In addition to the [RFC PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/45), the [initial implementation PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587) by `@maniwani` and the [Bevy Engine internals port PR](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7267) by `@alice-i-cecile` are great places to start if you would like a view into our process and rationale. As we all know, plans and implementations are two different things. Our final implementation is a bit different from the initial RFC (in a good way).

There's been a lot of changes, but we've put a lot of care into ensuring the [migration path](/learn/book/migration-guides/0.9-0.10/) for existing applications is relatively straightforward. Don't sweat it!

Lets take a look at what shipped in 0.10!

> ## A Single Unified Schedule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### A Single Unified Schedule
```

Have you ever wanted to specify that `system_a` runs before `system_b`, only to be met with confusing warnings that `system_b` isn't found because it's in a different stage?

No more! All systems within a single **schedule** are now stored in a single data structure with a global awareness of what's going on.

This simplifies our internal logic, makes your code more robust to refactoring, and allows plugin authors to specify high-level invariants (e.g. "movement must occur before collision checking") without locking themselves in to an exact schedule location.

> ![main_schedule_diagram](main_schedule_diagram.svg)

Reviewer 19: It's not merged yet, but you might want to use the color coded version (which also includes de a11y related systems): https://github.com/jakobhellermann/bevy_mod_debugdump/pull/16

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/188612/222808455-bf51e4e4-6e47-460c-82ac-264516ba37b2.svg
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/188612/222842007-6e4954a3-549a-44fa-a56d-da0cb84c6eb6.png)

Reviewer 3: Much nicer!

Author: Ooh thats really nice!

This diagram, made with [@jakobhellermann's `bevy_mod_debugdump` crate](https://github.com/jakobhellermann/bevy_mod_debugdump) shows a simplified version of Bevy's default schedule.

> ## Configurable System Sets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configurable System Sets
```

        .run_if(not(game_paused))
    )
    .configure_set(
        PhysicSet::CollisionDetection
        .in_base_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate)
    )
```

A system can belong to any number of sets, adding the configuration from each set it belongs to to its own configuration. Similarly, sets can be nested, allowing you to granularly define a clear set of rules for app-level scheduling patterns.

These rules must be compatible with each other: any paradoxes (like a system set inside of itself, or a system that must run both before and after a set) will result in a runtime panic with a helpful error message.

As long as you can construct the type of a system set, you can both order your systems relative to it, and configure its behavior even after it has been initialized elswhere! Crucially system configuration is strictly additive: you cannot _remove_ rules added elsewhere. This is both a "anti-spaghetti" and "plugin privacy" consideration. When this rule is combined with Rust's robust type privacy rules, plugin authors can make careful decisions about which exact invariants need to be upheld, and reorganize code and systems internally without breaking consumers.

> ## Directly Schedule Exclusive Systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Directly Schedule Exclusive Systems
```

```rust
app
    .add_system(ordinary_system)
    // This works?!
    .add_system(exclusive_system.after(ordinary_system))
```

This is particularly powerful, as **command flushes** (which apply any queued up `Commands` added in systems to e.g. spawn and despawn entities) are now simply performed in the `apply_system_buffers` exclusive system.

```rust
app
    .add_systems((
        system_that_produces_commands,
        // Built-in exclusive system that applies generated commands
        apply_system_buffers,
        system_that_needs_commands_to_have_been_applied
    // chain() creates an ordering between each of these systems,
    // so we know that our commands will have been applied by the time our last system is run
    ).chain().in_set(CoreSet::PostUpdate))
```

Do be careful with this pattern though: it's easy to quickly end up with many poorly ordered exclusive systems, creating bottlenecks and chaos.

Similarly, state transitions can be scheduled manually, one type at a time, in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.

What will you do with this much power? We're keen to find out!

> ## It's All Schedules? Managing complex control flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### It's All Schedules? Managing complex control flow
```

```

Bevy uses this pattern for five rather different things at 0.10 release:

1. **Startup systems:** these now live in their own schedule, which is run once at the start of the app.
2. **Fixed timestep systems:** another schedule?! The exclusive system that runs this schedule accumulates time, running a while loop that repeatedly runs `CoreSchedule::FixedTimestep` until all of the accumulated time has been spent.
3. **Entering and exiting states:** a bonanza of schedules. Each collection of systems that runs logic to enter and exit a state variant is stored in its own schedule, which are called based on the change in state in the `apply_state_transitions::<S>` exclusive system.
4. **Rendering:** all rendering logic is stored in its own schedule to allow it to run asynchronously relative to gameplay logic.
5. **Controlling the outermost loop:** in order to handle the "startup schedule first, then main schedule" logic, we wrap it all up in a minimal overhead `CoreSchedule::Outer` and then run our schedules as the sole exclusive system there.

Follow the bread crumbs starting at [`CoreSchedule`](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/app/enum.CoreSchedule.html) for more info.

> ## Simpler Run Conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Simpler Run Conditions
```

Bevy 0.10 is shipping with a lovely collection of built-in [common run conditions](https://dev-docs.bevyengine.org/bevy/ecs/schedule/common_conditions/index.html). Courtesy of [#6587 by `@maniwani`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/6587), [#7579 by `@inodentry`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7579), [#7806 by `@jakobhellermann`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7806), and [#7866 by `@jabuwu`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7866) you can easily run systems if there are events to process, timers that elapsed, resources that changed, input state changes, and more.

When you need something more sophisticated, combining run conditions is a breeze. Courtesy of [#7547](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7547), [#7559](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7559), and [#7605](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/7605), you can create new run conditions with the use of system piping and the `not`, `and_then` or `or_else` run criteria combinators.

> ## Simpler States

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Simpler States
```

fn start_game(
    button_query: Query<&Interaction, With<StartGameButton>>,
    next_state: ResMut<NextState<AppState>>,
){
    let start_game_interaction_state = button_query.single();
    if start_game_interaction_state == Interaction::Pressed {
        *next_state = NextState(AppState::InGame);
    }
}
```

But wait you say: what about my state stack? My elaborate queued transitions?! My meticulous error handling on every operation that I definitely didn't just unwrap?!!

In practice, we found that the state stack was a) very complex to learn b) very prone to exasperating bugs c) mostly ignored.
As a result, states are now "stackless": only one queued state of each type at a time.

Thanks to the help of some brave alpha testers, we're reasonably confident that this shouldn't be too bad to migrate away from.
If you were relying on the state stack, you might choose to:

* rearchitect some of that logic out of states
* use additional state types, which capture orthogonal elements of your app's status
* build your own state stack abstraction using the same patterns as Bevy's first-party version: please let the rest of the community know so you can collaborate!

> ## Base Sets: Getting Default Behavior Right

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Base Sets: Getting Default Behavior Right
```

2. Sometimes this system runs before input handling, leading to randomly dropped inputs. Sometimes it runs after rendering, leading to strange flickers.
3. After much frustration, the user discovers that these are due to "system execution order ambiguities".
4. The user runs a specialized tool, digs into the source code of the engine, figures out what order their system should run in relative to the engine's system sets, and then continues on their merry way, doing this for each new system.
5. Bevy (or one of their third-party plugins) updates, breaking all of our poor users system ordering once again.

In practice, there are three broad classes of systems: gameplay logic (the majority of all end user systems), stuff that needs to happen before gameplay logic (like event cleanup and input handling) and stuff that needs to happen after gameplay logic (like rendering and audio).

By broadly ordering the schedule via base sets, we hope that Bevy apps can have good default behavior and clear high level structure without compromising on the scheduling flexibility and explicitness that advanced users crave.
Let us know how it works out for you!

> ## Polish Matters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Polish Matters
```

to enable this, but the final step of actually running them in parallel was not done until now.
There was a bit of tricky work to figure out. The render world has a system that has to run on
the main thread, but the task pool only had the ability to run on the world's thread. So, when we send
the render world to another thread we need to accommodate still running render systems on the main
thread. So we added the ability to spawn tasks onto the main thread in addition to the world's thread.

![Histogram of Many Foxes Frame Time](pipelined-rendering-histogram.png)

In testing different Bevy examples, the gains were typically in the 10% to 30% range.
As seen in the above histogram, the mean frame time of the "many foxes" stress test
is 1.8ms faster than before.

To use pipelined rendering, you just need to add the `PipelinedRenderingPlugin`. If you're
using `DefaultPlugins` then it will automatically be added for you on all platforms except
wasm. Bevy does not currently support multithreading on wasm which is needed for this
feature to work. If you are not using `DefaultPlugins` you can add the plugin manually.

> ## Added a post-build method on Plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Added a post-build method on Plugin
```
